start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Leaking Windows ?
Homeowners insurance policies vary a lot so the only way to find out for sure is to file a claim . With that said the general guideline is that it depends on what caused the leaking . If it was caused by an unexpected event such as a windstorm or a tree hitting the house then you probably are covered , if the windows have just gotten old and started leaking over time , then this is probably not covered because of the normal wear and tear exclusion .
A homeowners policy covers damage that is the result of a specified peril . The most commonly covered perils are fire , wind and hail but there are many additional perils covered in modern policies . If those types of incidents caused the windows to leak then there will probably be adequate coverage .
Coverage for water damage is restricted by exclusions from the homeowners policy . if the leak is from outside water -LRB- roof , windows , -RRB- it isnt covered . If it is from a back-up of a sewer or drain , it is not covered -LRB- unless you have bought that additional coverage . -RRB- If it is from water that is coming into the house from the ground through the foundation , it is not covered . The normal scenario is that a water line bursts and floods a room or more . what you do once the leak is detected is critical in limiting damage -LRB- which is your responsibility . -RRB- Know where the water shut off valve is located in your house . Call your agent , company or a remediation contractor . Get the flow stopped . Get the water removed ; Get your property properly dried . the damage might be much less than you expect . the damage is covered after the deductible is satisfied .
Homeowners insurance policies vary a lot so the only way to find out for sure is to file a claim . With that said the general guideline is that it depends on what caused the leaking . If it was caused by an unexpected event such as a windstorm or a tree hitting the house then you probably are covered , if the windows have just gotten old and started leaking over time , then this is probably not covered because of the normal wear and tear exclusion .
Your homeowners insurance policy covers damage , not maintenance . If the window leaks because of damage and the damage were caused by a covered peril -LRB- listed in the policy , -RRB- then the company will be liable for the claim and will adjust the claim by determining the loss and subtracting your deductible . You should be aware that water damage from water outside the home is subject to some exclusion and you might want to consult your agent before filing a claim .
A homeowners policy covers damage that is the result of a specified peril . The most commonly covered perils are fire , wind and hail but there are many additional perils covered in modern policies . If those types of incidents caused the windows to leak then there will probably be adequate coverage .
You really have to look at your policy and file a claim to find out . However , typically policies either list the perils that it covers or list open peril coverage with what it excludes . Your window leak may be covered if caused by a covered peril . The proxmiate cause would have to be determined . However , you may want to compare the cost to fix the problem with your deductible , if it is under your deductible amount it makes no sense to even attempt to file a claim . As always ask your local insurance agent for advice specific to your state .
Not sure what type of leak you are referring to , but in regards to things like roof leaks and pipe leaks generally speaking a home insurance policy could pay to fix the damage the leak causes but most wo n't pay to fix the actual leak itself . BE AWARE that this pertains to new or recent leaks . Many carriers have put language in their policy contracts over the last couple of years excluding coverage for for prolonged leaks . Some carriers have even set a time frame as short as 14 days for this exclusion . Every carrier is different and those carriers are even different from state to state . This is something you definitely need to run past your local independent agent . Do n't discuss this in general terms , but ask for the specific language in your actual policy .
A broken window may be covered by a homeowners insurance policy depending on what broke the window . If an object flew through the window or a vandal broke the window this would be covered minus your deductible . Of course there are other perils that could be covered as well . Just keep in mind your deductible does apply and more often then not if the window is the only damage the window is probably less then your deductible .
No . Home Insurance is not intended to cover a toilet leak . Typically the cost to repair such a leak is minor and Insurers expect the insured to take care of that on their own . Youcan get a warranty policy to cover major systems in the home . Home owners insurance covers areas like vandalism , fire , storm damage etc and tends to focus more on the structure of the home than the minor repairs that result from normal wear and tear . Plus most home owner polices have a deductible that must be paid before claims are paid . If the repair is less than the deductible it makes more financial sense to just fix it .
Homeowners Insurance policies generally do cover ceiling leaks ; however , one must be cautious on this topic . Primarily , we must discover the cause of loss and make sure that the cause of loss is one of the covered perils on the policy . We must be certain that there were no exclusions on the policy -LRB- i.e. Roof Leaking Exclusion -RRB- . In few situations , a carrier may be willing to insure a home knowing that the roof is not in good condition , it has been known for few carriers to accept a roof exclusion and in this case , the policy would not cover leaks as a result of the known and exluded condition . If the loss is covered , items that will affect the payout of the claim would be Depreciation -LRB- if the policy is not a replacement cost policy -RRB- and the selected Deductible which will be deducted from the final payout ! For information on a homeowners policy , please review the following : WEBSITELINK
The actual pipes -LRB- Plumbing -RRB- from leaking or bursting is excluded on a homeowners policy . However the damage the burst caused the dwelling could be covered . In the case of a leak coverage would be more difficult to determine if the leak has been occurring over a long period of time . A water main is usually away from the house so the chances of damage to the dwelling are low . The big question to ask is `` Was there any damage to the dwelling '' ? . If there is no damage to the dwelling you can immediately figure out there is no claim to be made . Leaks in general are just part of common maintenance of a homeowner . Always contact to agent to discuss the details of your particular situation to help determine if there is coverage for a water main leak .
If the cause of a slab leak is a named peril the leak will be covered . In an all-risk policy that includes every conceivable cause of loss except those specifically excluded . Some of those exclusions could cause a slab to leak . There isnt coverage if the slab leaks because of underground water , or earth movement . If the crack was the result of settling , cracking , or shrinking the claim would not be covered .
A renters -LRB- tenants -RRB- policy does not cover the residence . If there is water damage to your personal property -LRB- furniture , clothes etc. -RRB- the policy will probably provide coverage . The nature of the loss is important . If it comes from water entering the house from outside or backing up through the sewers , then it is probably not covered . If it is the result of a sudden breaking of a water pipe in the wall , then it probably is covered . The gray area comes with a slow leak and damage it might cause . The issue then is when was the leak detected . If it was allowed to continue after discovery for a period of time , a resultant claim might not be honored . You always have a responsibility to reduce your exposure and that would include notifying someone that something is leaking in the rental unit .
If the leak is simply caused by wear and tear then the leak would not be covered since wear and tear and/or deterioration are not covered perils . If say for example a storm blew through blowing shingles off the roof and causing a leak this would be a covered peril .
If you have the right type of homeowners coverage , this question would be easier to answer . The right type of homeowners coverage would cover your property , both real property -LRB- your home , garage , built in pools , etc. -RRB- and personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture , dishes , yard fixtures , things you could take with you if you moved -RRB- for damage unless there is a specific exclusion or limitation in the policy that says it doesnt . I dont think you will find a specific exclusion or limitation for a pool leak but you will find one that says damage caused by wear and tear or deterioration , or inherent vice would not be covered . So the issue would be , why did the pool leak ? If the liner simply wore out from age or there was a defect , you probably wont be covered . But if neither of these apply ; you may find coverage for the damage . Unfortunately , most people dont have the right homeowners policy . Their policies limit coverage on personal property -LRB- such as above ground pools -RRB- to specific named perils . I call these the wrong kind of homeowners policies . If you have this type of policy , you must show the insurance company the damage was caused by one of the named perils . A pool leak is not a named peril . Under that type of policy , I think you are going to be out of luck .
It may . It will primarily depend onwhether the leak was the result of a covered loss or not . Under normal circumstances and the leak not caused by a covered event ; the leak would more than likely not be covered . Please remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and learn of any exclusions contained within or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Depends on what caused the leak . No for flood -LRB- rain that hits the ground -RRB- nor a continuous -LRB- over Time -RRB- maintenance type leak . The homeowners policy is designed for spontanous leaking of water . e.g. burk pipe , leaking washing machine hose , snapped the shower handle off and it took 1/2 hour to find the shut off . I use these examples because they have happened to my clients Patrick
It will , but it also depends upon where the water came from . If there is a heavy wind and rain storm and the wind damages your roof , causing rain water to leak in and damage the inside of your home , there will be coverage for that . If on the other hand , the heavy rain does not causedirect damage to your home , but raises the water table in your property , which causeswater to leak into your basement , it is possible that there would not be any coverage for that because ground waterdamage is usually excluded under a homeowners policy . Be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverge for failure of any sewars or drainage systems like curtain drains or sump pumps . If you have such coverage , then you will be more likely to be covered if your basement fills with water as a result of any failure .
Typically no . How water damage coverage works is your walls , floors , ceiling and personal property will be covered by leaking pipes . This means if a pipe bursts your everything else except the pipes will be covered . Now there are a couple of exceptions to this , one if your home is vacant for 90 days or more ; or if you do n't heat your home properly and the pipes freeze . I said typically because you can always buy back the coverage , meaning you can spend a little extra money to make pipes a covered item in your policy . However , this is usually not a great concern for people because there is coverage to replace everything else , and tear apart and the area where the leak occurred . You are just left with the bill for the pipes and replacing them . Hope this helps .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Incontinence Supplies ?
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for incontinence supplies such as adult diapers and bed pads . If the insured person is in a hospital or skilled nursing facility , those items will be covered under Medicare Part A.Otherwise , Part B will not cover them due them not being classified as durable medical equipment .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for incontinence supplies such as adult diapers and bed pads . If the insured person is in a hospital or skilled nursing facility , those items will be covered under Medicare Part A.Otherwise , Part B will not cover them due them not being classified as durable medical equipment .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not cover adult incontinence diapers and bed liners used at home because they are thrown away after each use , and not considered Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . If hospitalized or in a skilled nursing facility , Medicare will pay for incontinence diapers under Part A. Medicare will cover catheters .
As Peggy indicated , Medicare Part B does not cover incontinence diapers . This means there are no discounts , even if you purchase from a Medicare approved DME provider that accepts assignment . Many retailers such as Target and Walmart will carrier adult diapers and have good pricing . You should also consider warehouse clubs such as Costco and Sams as well as online retailers including Amazon .
Hypnotherapy would not be covered by Medicare to help control urinary incontinence . There maybe some mental health issues where Medicare will pay some of the cost for hypnotherapy but I do n't believe it will cover any of the cost for the problem you are having .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
Ostomy supplies may be covered under Medicare Part B. Whether Medicare will cover the supplies or not depends on how your doctor has documented the need for such supplies . Depending on the type of ostomy you have , Medicare may cover supplies for up to 3 months at a time , assuming you have met your Part B deductible .
Medicare Part D does cover some diabetic supplies . Part D will cover supplies that are used for administration of insulin -LRB- syringes , needles , alcohol swabs , gauze and inhaled insulin devices -RRB- . Medicare Part B covers diabetic supplies such as blood glucose monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance.It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , Medicare does cover insulin pump supplies under Medicare Part B . If the Medicare patient uses syringes or pen for diabetes , rather than a pump , those supplies are not covered by Part B but are covered by Part D . The diabetic person using the insulin pump must have type 1 diabetes , or hard to control type 2 or gestational diabetes .
Yes , Medicare will cover Cpap supplies for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea . When first being evaluated , Medicare will pay for three months of Cpap usage and supplies on a trial basis . Once it it determined that obstructive sleep apnea is the cause of sleep symptoms , and that Cpap therapy works in alleviating those symptoms , Medicare will extend the coverage period for which they will pay for Cpap machine and supplies .
Diabetes Supplies & Services Supplies : Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- covers some diabetes supplies , including : Blood sugar -LRB- glucose -RRB- test strips Blood sugar testing monitors Insulin Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions Therapeutic shoes or inserts Part B covers some diabetes services , including : Diabetes self-management training Yearly eye exam Foot exam Glaucoma tests Nutrition therapy services -LRB- medical -RRB-
Medicare Part A , in short , is your hospital insurance - Part B is your physician insurance . Part A provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Part B covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . You 're generally responsible for a deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 for Part A and $ 147 for Part B -RRB- and about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred during these visits - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Most diabetic supplies are covered under Medicare Part B including blood sugar monitors , test strips and lancets . Medicare sets a limit on the number of lancets you can get during a 90 day period . If you need more your doctor must certify they are medically necessary . Medicare will not pay for any supplies -LRB- icluding monitors -RRB- sent to you directly that you did not order . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier that accepts assignment .
Medicare Part B covers some diabetic supplies , including blood glucose testing monitors , blood glucose test strips , lancets , lancet devices , and glucose control solutions . People with diabetes may receive shoe inserts to prevent foot sores , and some may even receive therapeutic shoes . Medicare Part D covers syringes and other supplies associated with the administration of insulin .
Medicare Part B covers the doctor services , outpatient hospital services , medical services and supplies . There is a monthly cost charged to the Social Security check received . There is a deductible and 20 % copayments if incurred . In addition you pay all costs for services and supplies not covered by Medicare .
Medicare is concerned about diabetes type II and includes coverage for many diabetes testing equipment and supplies . Your doctor must prescribe your diabetic supplies . Some of the Medicare Part B covered items include testing strips , glucose meters , lancets and insulin but ONLY IF it is used in a pump . Levemir flexpen 's are part of Medicare Part D . If your drug plan includes the flexpen under the formulary some of the cost may be reimbursed .
Medicare is looking at installing a new program in some parts of the country called the competitive bidding program -LRB- CBP -RRB- . The idea is to lower costs and create more accurate prices for certain durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- from suppliers . In short , suppliers `` bid '' to provide certain medical equipment and supplies at a lower price than what Medicare currently pays . Medicare then uses the bid numbers to set the amount it pays for supplies - winning bids are chosen as the contract suppliers for Medicare .
Walmart does accept Medicare Part B. Qualified Medicare recipients can purchase durable medical equipment , medical supplies , and other items covered by Medicare Part B in the Walmart pharmacy area . Walmart also is a participating provider in most Medicare Part D plans , and you can purchase drugs covered under Medicare Part D in a Walmart pharmacy .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Homeowners Insurance Cover Mold ?
Great question ! After the great media `` black mold '' scare a few years back -LRB- yes , black mold is bad , as is most mold and fungi -RRB- most insurers quietly cut that coverage out of their homeowners policies . That is especiallytrue in the humid southern states , where mold is difficult to prevent . There may be a small amount of damage that is covered in your specific policy , so it is well worth your time to contact your agent and find out . If your policy has been in force for many years , it may also be a covered item , if the company had n't amended your policy along the way . Contact your agent , and they can tell you for certain . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
-- > Normal 0 Mold is a slow growing organism that forms on plants , food and other matter . You will find most property and liability insurance policies include an endorsement specifically limiting coverage for Fungi , Wet or Dry Rot or Bacteria . Mold damage used to be covered by property insurance policies , like homeowners policies , if it resulted from another covered loss . A few years ago , insurers slipped an exclusion into their policies for all types of mold loss but softened the impact by including a nominal amount -LRB- usually $ 10,000 -RRB- of coverage for mold damage to property and $ 50,000 for liability to others . Higher limits are usually available for an additional premium but most insurance buyers are not even aware of this option . Mold damage following a water damage loss or the breakdown of mechanical equipment could result in a serious loss . Increasing the mold coverage limits on homeowners , tenant-homeowners , dwelling and other property insurance policies should certainly be considered . This type of coverage , mold damage resulting from another covered loss , used to be free and was subject only to a policys limit . Now you have to pay for it and specific limits will apply but it remains an important insurance program consideration .
-- > Normal 0 Mold is a slow growing organism that forms on plants , food and other matter . You will find most property and liability insurance policies include an endorsement specifically limiting coverage for Fungi , Wet or Dry Rot or Bacteria . Mold damage used to be covered by property insurance policies , like homeowners policies , if it resulted from another covered loss . A few years ago , insurers slipped an exclusion into their policies for all types of mold loss but softened the impact by including a nominal amount -LRB- usually $ 10,000 -RRB- of coverage for mold damage to property and $ 50,000 for liability to others . Higher limits are usually available for an additional premium but most insurance buyers are not even aware of this option . Mold damage following a water damage loss or the breakdown of mechanical equipment could result in a serious loss . Increasing the mold coverage limits on homeowners , tenant-homeowners , dwelling and other property insurance policies should certainly be considered . This type of coverage , mold damage resulting from another covered loss , used to be free and was subject only to a policys limit . Now you have to pay for it and specific limits will apply but it remains an important insurance program consideration .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Mold and fungus coverage may be covered under your renters insurance . But the coverage most likely will be limited to a certain number , like $ 5K or $ 25K and deductible will apply . To better answer this question , check your insurance policy . If you can electronically search for the word `` mold '' do that . For example , The Hartford Insurance Company generally will pay out for mold damage that 's a direct result of a peril that 's covered by your policy . Let 's say mold , which needs moisture to thrive , is caused by water from a failed pipe , a covered peril . In that case , any resulting mold damage should be covered because the source of the water is covered by your policy . However , if mold is due to long-term neglect or overdue maintenance , then homeowners insurance is unlikely to cover the damage . Visit our website and instantly compare 3 HO proposals from Hartford , Travelers , Safeco on WEBSITELINK
Mold is already in every home . Coverage from your homeowners policy will largely depend on the cause of the mold . If there in infestation of mold in the home , it is most likely excluded by the wording of the policy . However , that doesnt mean that a claim will be denied . If the mold is the result of a bust pipe , for example , coverage would probably be available . Some companies put a limit on recovery for mold damage . Some companies offer additional mold coverage for an additional premium . There are companies that write a stand-alone mold policy . The key is to prevent mold .
There are hundreds of species of mold common to the United States . Small areas of visible mold that build up on moist areas in a home not only look bad but are also a health risk , the mold may cause allergy like symptoms and/or breathing difficulties . Basic home insurance policies , generally limit coverage for mold or exclude it . It is very easy for mold to grow given suitable conditions in a home that does n't show pride of ownership ; mold claims became so excessive in prior years , the insurance industry chose to limit or exclude coverage rather than raise premium to address the growing claims . Although the standard coverage will vary from State to State as well as vary between insurance carriers , it is important to view your specific insurance policy to find out if there is coverage for mold and what the limit is.In some cases , a carrier will actually allow an extended amount of coveragefor an additional premium . It is best to maintain a clean and moisture free structure to prevent the growth of mold . In homes with a basement , it is important to remove all moisture as quickly as possible following any leaks . The Federal EPA recommends homeowners clean up any area affected by mold which is less than 10 square feet using bleach or a suitable product , any area larger than that should involve a professional .
Mold is present in almost every home . Every home provides the environment for mold growth except for one thing , moisture . When there is damage from mold it is most often the result of leaking fixtures and appliances . Your homeowners policy likely contains specific exclusions for mold , however if the mold is the result of a covered lossruptured pipe , it could be a covered loss .
Mold is often specifically excluded in homeowners policies . Some companies place a monetary limit on the damages from mold . The underlying concept is that mold is present in every building but that moisture is required to activate the spores . Seeping water is also excluded as this is considered a maintenance issue . Mold is not sudden . If you suspect mold you need to contact an industrial hygienist to determine if mold is actually present and then have it removed . In the process the remediation contractor will likely discover the source of the moisture . As a preventative step replace washer hoses and the lines to the water dispenser in your refrigerator every few years . These are notorious sources of seeping water .
Homeowners insurance policies have a mold limitation or exclusion on the policy so there is a limit to the coverage . Also the question would be what caused the mold . If the mold was caused by a covered claim then there may be some limited coverage . If this is something occurring due to a non covered claim most likely the mold would be excluded . Always check with your agent .
Companies do cover mold damage , in many cases , yes , but more likely than not , there will be a specific limit on the coverage provided , usually about $ 10,000.00 . The mold must be of course the result of a covered peril in your Homeowners policy . In other words , if your home develops mold as a result of a flood , there will be no coverage because the cause of loos was the flood which is excluded under a Homeowners policy . You would need Flood Insurance for that .
Maybe . First , you must examine your policy to see if there is a universal denial of coverage for any mold damage . If there is then you are out of luck . However , if there is no such denial of coverage , move on to step 2 . Second , determine the source of the mold . This is important because mold needs moisture to grow . If your mold problem can be traced to a pipe bursting and spraying water all over your home , then you can make the claim . If the mold is growing because your house is old and moisture got in due to lack of maintenance , then you are out of luck . Another example is water backup , if your sewage drain backs up and you have resultant damage , without a sewer/drain backup endorsement you will be denied coverage . So , in summary : 1 -RRB- is mold excluded no matter what ; and 2 -RRB- if mold is not excluded , was it caused by a covered cause of loss ?
Great question ! After the great media `` black mold '' scare a few years back -LRB- yes , black mold is bad , as is most mold and fungi -RRB- most insurers quietly cut that coverage out of their homeowners policies . That is especiallytrue in the humid southern states , where mold is difficult to prevent . There may be a small amount of damage that is covered in your specific policy , so it is well worth your time to contact your agent and find out . If your policy has been in force for many years , it may also be a covered item , if the company had n't amended your policy along the way . Contact your agent , and they can tell you for certain . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Mold is an issue that has received a great deal of attention in the media . A homeowners policy is designed to cover specified perils . Most of these perils are sudden and catastrophic . Mold is in every home all the time . Building materials provide a food source for mold . All that is needed for rapid growth of mold is moisture . The issue is frequently leaky pipes . The damage caused by leaky pipes is generally excluded . Speak to your agent before filing a claim to make sure that you have a solid claim .
Mold is in every home . Building materials provide the food necessary for mold to grow . Moisture is the ingredient necessary for mold to become a problem . Moisture , most commonly comes from leaking plumbing . Leaky plumbing is excluded in most homeowners policies . If the mold is the result of a sudden discharge from a pipe in the home , coverage might be available ; however , remediation normally eliminates that from happening .
Typically mold is not covered since mold is produced by continual water penetration that is either undetected or ignored . When water damage is covered on a policy , it is usually only covered if the original cause of loss is covered . You state you were told the original cause of loss was wind damage . If the water damage occurred at the same time , and was a factor of the wind damage -LRB- both happened during the same storm -RRB- , then depending on the type of policy you have -LRB- not the insurance carrier , but the actual policy -RRB- , you may have coverage . There are two types of policies - Open Peril and Named Peril . This is the first item you need to know about the policy you hold . On an Open Peril policy , all perils -LRB- specific cause of loss -RRB- are covered unless they are specifically excluded . On a Named Peril policy , all perils are excluded unless they are specifically listed as covered . On most policies , water damage is listed as excluded , unless specific conditions are met . For example , the policies my company writes in my area covers for `` accidental direct , distinct and demonstrable physical water damage of covered property from direct contact with water , but only if the water results from : '' and then goes on to list what conditions need to be present . In my opinion , unless the water damage was specifically caused by wind damage , and both losses were reported at the same time , you might not have coverage for these items . And most likely not the mold damage regardless of the cause .
Homeowner 's policies vary a lot and mold is excluded on a lot of policies so the only way to find out is to file a claim . It will probably depend on what caused the mold and exactly what the mold wording on your policy is .
As a rule the answer would be no . Mold is caused by long standing dampness . Your homeowners policy may cover leaking roof due to wind or other covered peril but it is not going to cover mold in most situations . Check with your local agent to see if there are any exceptions in your policy .
Generally NO . Property insurance does not cover problems that occur over time . And mold in the attic or anywhere is the result of long term unremediated moisture exposure and considered a maintenance issue . Some insurers provide limited mold remediation subsequent to a covered water claim but no stand alone coverage for the mold issue itself . Check with your insurance professional for a detailed explanation .
Actuaries are people who study statistics . They can track the life expectance of a 35 year old male , living on the shady side of the street , who has red hair and is over 6 feet tall . However , what the actually do is develop statistics that show the life expectancy of a 35 year old male who is average or standard . They also develop statistics that show the effect of varying levels of hypertension or obesity and from this information they develop substandard rates . The process of underwriting is to see if you fit into a standard mold , substandard mold or a preferred mold . Of course you might not qualify for any mold at all .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Is New York Car Insurance ?
New York auto insurance premiums vary throughout the state . Rates downstate and in the five boroughs tend to be higher than upstate . It all depends on your coverage limits , credit score , ticket/accident activity and if there has been any lapse in coverage . If you are interested in a quote , I have a variety of auto insurance carriers in New York . Contact me at fwinterle@creativeins.net .
Most agents and brokers in New York use either the carrier websites or an online rating program to develop auto insurabnce quotes . Somewhere between 50 and 60 pieces of information are required just to select the rating ` tiers ' the carriers use . Some carriers have only 15 to 20tiers and some have over 100 . Your data isentered into the program . The carrier 's program uses this data to selectyour rating tier . Some factors such as : own or rent your home , gender , age , number of years licensed , driving record , credit profile , claims history -LRB- not only auto but property insurance claimsmay also be figured in ... -RRB- and on and on . Several years ago , only your driving record and claims history were the major factors involved . Today , your credit profile has a very major impact on how much you will pay - some carriers will not even develop a quote if your credit profile is not within their tolerances . So keep your credit score and profile as good as possible . Always ask your agent or broker for a ` guaranteed ' quote as some rating programs may not come up with a final ` guaranteed ' quote unless the agent or broker pays some fees for the data retrieval -LRB- of the credit data , claims data , and DMV extracts -RRB- to their system vendor or their carrier . In New York , insurance quote retrievals of your credit data are considered a ` no-hit ' to your credit status so you can ask several compnies to quote your insurance without penalty to your credit .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 949 797 2424 . Thank you .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
Car insurance rates in New York are determined by many variables . Some of the most important factors are your driving record -LRB- including other family members -RRB- , your zip code or county , your age , the type of vehicle you drive , your credit history , how the vehicle is used and the types of coverage you carry . Additionally , the company you are insured with plays a big role in determining the rates . So ... how do you get a free quote for car insurance in New York ? A reputable nationwide -LRB- or New York based -RRB- car insurance website will zoom -LRB- pun intended -RRB- you to your destination . Typically , you can compare the best offers and get expert advice at no cost .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
The AARP branded life insurance is actually New York Life . They just pay for the AARP branding . They go all the way to guaranteed issue so the only three questions on that are going to be 1 . What is your age ? 2 . What is your gender ? 3 . How much coverage do you want ? Anyone considering this policy would be well advised to keep looking . It 's probably the worst deal you can get . Most people can get a much lower premium and first day full coverage rather than accept the terms of a guaranteed issue policy . AARP often tries to sneak into the fine print `` Premiums are not guaranteed . You can not be singled out for a rate increase but we can increase them on all insureds . '' That is completely unacceptable . New York Life is wise to pay AARP to use their name to sell this . No one who reads it would ever accept that deal . But some AARP members trust the brand name so much they do n't read it .
Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is a mutual company based in New York City , New York . They also have regional offices all across the northern states , from Washington to New York . Rated A + + by AM Best , Guardian Life Insurance Company has several subsidiaries , including Berkshire Life Insurance Company of America .
Yes , absolutely you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . Without it you would not be following the regulations set by New York Department of Financial Services - Insurance Industry . Before obtaining a license to sell life insurance you must study , take a practice -LRB- proctored -RRB- exam and pass . Then , you must pass the ` real exam ' in order to get a license to sell life insurance in New York .
I am happy to report that New York Life is America 's oldest and largest Mutual Life Insurance Company in America . Being a Mutual Life Insurer , means there are no stockholders to try to please . The Owners are the Policy Holders . This can mean substantial savings for Policy Holders of a Mutual Life Insurer like New York Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 949 797 2424 .
The state of New York is one of the most highly regulated states in the country . Residents of New York general pay more for coverage . It 's critical in securing the best possible price tag by going online to a brokerage firm that has an extension inventory of New York approved careers to secure the best deal .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
New York Life has relationships with a number of other quality insurance companies to offer many products , including disability insurance . Through these arrangements , customers can work with a New York Life agent to obtain a wide variety of products not underwritten by New York Life itself . Disability insurance can provide peace of mind and removes the uncertainty in case of an accident or sickness that makes someone incapable of working . When considering such coverage , one should review both short term and long term options . Business should also consider Disability insurance for key business persons in the business .
No , Health Insurance DOES NOT cover Long Term Care . Long Term Care needs to be covered through either Long Term Care Insurance , or a Unique Product offered by New York Life called Asset Preserver . New York Life can provide you with Long Term Care Insurance in an extremely large variety of personalized policies , or an Asset Protector which will provide you with Both Life Insurance and Long Term Care in one product . Please call me , Gary Lane , New York Life Agent , for the details that can fit your exact needs .
Yes . New York Life is a top rated life insurance company . They are a mutual company which means they are owned by their policy owners not Wall Street investors . They are known for their excellent whole-life products . a different division of New York Life sells mail order life insurance which is co-branded by AARP . These are quite different from the New York Life products offered by their agents .
To buy life insurance in New York , you can go to a website that offers it , look through your Yellow Pages and call an agency , or ask friends , relatives or co-workers for a referral . When purchasing online , you can use the quote engines and put in New York to see if they offer policies there . New York has its own companies so not every agency does business there .
Matt is correct . New York Life is an independent national insurance company . We are a mutual company , meaning our policy holders own our company , and we are not beholden to Stock Holders , so we can have lower rates and better service . In addition to Term Policies , we offer our flagship Whole Life Policies , along with Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities , Pension Replacements , College Funding , a variety of Retirement Plans . For details , call a New York Life Agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 949 797 2424 . Thank you .
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
The simple answer to the question is YES . Depending upon your health , the policy can be issued . New York Life issues Life Insurance to folks up to age 80 . The price will depend entirely upon your health . How often do you see a doctor ? What for ? Do you have regular exams ? Do you take medications ? How many and what for ? I would love to talk with you about your needs . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 949 797 2424 .
end question
start question
health-insurance
For The Sake Of Privacy , Can A Dependent Apply For A 2nd Health Insurance ?
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test If you 're an older individuals -LRB- e.g. age 55 -RRB- , some carriers may also ask for an EKG to be completed with the other exam requirements . If you 're a senior -LRB- e.g. age 70 -RRB- , some carriers may ask you to complete a mature assessment -LRB- congnitive and physical movement testing - e.g. memory tests , walk a distance , etc. -RRB- . Exams typically take no more than a half hour or so and can be completed in the privacy of your own home -LRB- some people prefer their work place which is also acceptable -RRB- . You do n't have to go to a doctor 's office or a clinic to have the exams done . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . Please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Employer provided Disability Insurance is not covered under HIPAA . The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act was developed in part to simplify the health care system through electronic technology , yet protect the privacy of health information . The HIPAA Administration Simplification regulations exclude Disability Insurance because the benefit it provides does not fit their definition for a health plan . . As far as applying for a Disability Insurance policy goes , yes , your medical information privacy is protected by HIPAA .
Yes . And , they can be from different carriers , although I recommend that for convenience sake that they be from the same carrier , if possible . If you go on claim , you might have double the paperwork with two , separate carriers . It often happens , for example , that one be covered by a group plan at work and yet still not have up to 2/3 of income insured against disability . The maximum monthly benefit allowable on the group plan and any other voluntary employee DI benefits one can buy might not stretch to reach that goal . -LRB- The total amount of income replacement from all coverage usually can not exceed 2/3 of income . -RRB- Often , the provider of the group plan of insurance also writes coverage for individuals . An individually-owned supplemental policy can wrap around the group coverage . If the group carrier doesnt write individual policies , however , most any good DI carrier provides such additional coverage .
Life insurance is worth having if you have family beneficiaries or business partners who need to be indemnified in the event of your demise , i.e. they would suffer economic loss . So its definitely worth having for their sakes . Additionally , a fully suppressed TAMRA compliant death benefit designed for a non-modified endowment life insurance policy can deliver tax advantaged income as a supplemental retirement plan . That may be worth having for yourself .
It is important if you love anyone . Someone will incur grief , suffering and pain when you die . That is the human condition . Among those will be a group who will also suffer economic loss . If you care about those who will suffer economic loss make an appointment with a life insurance agent and begin the process of getting coverage , for their sake .
There are many carriers that have policies called non owned policy they are fairly inexpensive depending on your age and the state you live in . The policy only covers the liability portion and un insured and under insured if you choose the option of that which is highly recommended . It will not repair the car that you are driving but cover damages done to others . Depending on your state laws . Here in Montana the insurance follows the car first then the driver 2nd which means if you were driving a friends car and they gave you permission and you got into an accident their insurance would cover the 1st portion the 2nd would be your non owned policy because they gave you permission to use their car then permissive use would mean that their insurance liability would be responsible now his insurance may try and get some of the loss covered by your insurance . Check with your state guidelines . Or talk to a local agent .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Life insurance for the sake of the children is only as important as your dreams or the cultural expectations may dictate in your social strata of society . Education , weddings , down payment on a first home and an emergency fund are only a few of the items that generally are integrated into child planning for the future . If the question is regarding life insurance on a child , then final expense for funeral and medical expenses in the case of a childhood tragedy . In could be justified that educational outlays , or other large financial commitments born by the parents , would be reimbursed by the proceeds from a childs death claim .
There are a few reasons why life insurance proceeds would become part of the estate . The first reason was the estate was the beneficiary . This is not wise unless a trust has been established . This will tie up the life proceeds in probate and can make them taxable when they should be income tax free . The second common reason is the beneficiaries preceded the insured in death and there was no living contingent beneficiary . The third most common reason is an older life policy that the beneficiary has not been kept up to date . This is an example of why consumers need life brokers to stay in touch and keep these policies up to date for the sake of the beneficiaries .
Well I have to admit it sure seems like it sometimes but auto insurance does not increase every year . There are many variable factors that come into play into an auto insurance rate . For example , driving record , types of vehicles , marital status , where you live and more . However for the sake of argument lets assume all factors remain stagnant and the rate still increases . The insurance industry flows through what we call hard and soft markets . A soft market is when insurance carriers are showing a profit , loss ratios are good and investments are performing . A hard market is when profits are down , loss ratios are high and investments are performing under expectation . It is more of a constant guessing game for the insurance carriers to operate a business and keep their heads above water . If losses continue and profits are down an insurance carrier will make a necessary adjustment to remain solvent by increasing rates . Rate changes can be local or regional depending on performance in any given area . If the market turns around and profits increase the carriers will then loosen up into what we call a softer marketopeningthe doors to more potential clients by lowering the rates again . Cycles usually run for several years before they shift one way or the other simply due to the time it takes to gather loss information and process it . I will give you an example of some recent trends . During the dot com era insurance companies were performing very well and rates were down . The market crashed and rates began increasing due to poor market performance and increased losses . Carriers got a handle on the situation and things seemed to be going well for the next couple of years and rates actually dipped a little , but now it seems we are back at an upswing . If someone was paying $ 500.00 for a 6 month policy that dropped to $ 450.00 for a year they were happy . But then a year later went to $ 475.00 from the consumers point of view this is a rate increase forgetting just two years back they may have been paying $ 500.00 . Again sometimes this type of movement is difficult to see since variables come into play such as moving to a new location , adding or changing cars , adding drivers and so on . I hope that helped at least explain alittlebit on how the insurance industry operates .
You can go about securing coverage in one of two ways for this type of medical condition . A route with no medical questions would be issued under a guaranteed-issue , graded benefit whole life insurance policy -LRB- 2-year waiting period for full coverage to start - accident only coverage in years 1 and 2 -RRB- . The maximum amount of coverage you can secure under one of these programs is between $ 20,000 - $ 25,000 . Please note , most guaranteed-issue life insurance policy have a minimum age requirement of 45 or 50 years old . The 2nd route is going to be the most advantageous If you 're looking for more coverage than that , but you would need to go through full underwriting . These programs would allow you to secure full coverage from day 1 of the policy -LRB- no waiting period under a graded benefit -RRB- . The specific results of the liver enzyme tests for the conditions , the medications used to treat the condition , alcohol consumption frequency , how long you 've had the condition , and other factors contribute to the risk classification a carrier can offer -LRB- this determines the rates -LRB- cost -RRB- for the coverage , if approved -RRB- . Because there is a presence of hepatitis with cirrhosis of the liver , you will need to shop the case among multiple companies to see which carriers can consider coverage at what risk class . Every company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may be able to work with the medical history where others may not - for this , I highly recommend shopping the case first before applying for ANY coverage because throwing mud against the wall to see what sticks -LRB- applying to multiple companies -RRB- can work against you as it can become a red flag to insurance companies when they see declines in the MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- records . An independent insurance broker such as myself can do this for you . My group is licensed in over 35 states and with over 50 insurance companies and we charge no fees to our clients for our services . We can help you with the entire process from start to finish . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , please send me a message and we will help you shop the case so you can secure the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost - my contact information is provided on my profile . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much for your question .
You can go about securing coverage in one of two ways for this type of medical history . A route with no medical questions would be issued under a guaranteed-issue , graded benefit whole life insurance policy -LRB- 2-year waiting period for full coverage to start - accident only coverage in years 1 and 2 -RRB- . The maximum amount of coverage you can secure under one of these programs is between $ 20,000 - $ 25,000 . Please note , most guaranteed-issue life insurance policy have a minimum age requirement of 45 or 50 years old and a maximum age allowance of 80 or 85 years old . The 2nd route is going to be the most advantageous If you 're looking for more coverage than that , but you would need to go through full underwriting . These programs would allow you to secure full coverage from day 1 of the policy -LRB- no waiting period under a graded benefit -RRB- . The specific details regarding the stroke history -LRB- e.g. was there any paralysis and where , were there any lingering effects , are you still taking medications to treat lingering effects as a result of the stroke , etc. -RRB- as well as the diabetes history . For the diabetes history , the most recent A1C reading , when was it diagnosed , how is it being treated , etc. will affect the risk classification a carrier can/will offer -LRB- this determines the rates -LRB- cost -RRB- for the coverage , if approved -RRB- . You will need to shop the case among multiple companies to see which carriers can consider coverage at what risk class . Every company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may be able to work with the medical history where others may not - for this , I highly recommend shopping the case first before applying for ANY coverage because throwing mud against the wall to see what sticks -LRB- applying to multiple companies -RRB- can work against you as it can become a red flag to insurance companies when they see declines in the MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- records . An independent insurance broker such as myself can do this for you . My group is licensed in over 35 states and with over 50 insurance companies and we charge no fees to our clients for our services . We can help you with the entire process from start to finish . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , please send me a message and we will help you shop the case so you can secure the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost - my contact information is provided on my profile . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much for your question .
Does Hipaa apply to disability insurance ? Not sure how you mean it , but in some ways yes it does . The insurance company that you are applying to will have you sign off on a HIPAA form that gives your permission to the insurance company to contact your doctors and other medical services to gain information for underwriting purposes . As far as the insurance companies themselves , they have always operated under privacy laws set up by their industry . The HIPAA form is a bit of a redundancy as it applies to insurance .
In my work with funeral homes I have seen MANY cases where someone thought that their will would redirect the proceeds of their life insurance . Just a couple of months ago I was involved with a death where a man died and had been married to his 2nd wife for over 20-years . He and his 1st wife were bitter enemies . But he never changed the beneficiary on his life insurance policy . The entire $ 50,000 that the 2nd wife was expecting all went to his 1st wife . She was nice enough to pay the funeral expenses for him -LRB- she did n't have to . -RRB- But the remaining money all went to her . This is a very common error and is another example of why everyone needs a good local life insurance agent that they review things with every few years . Life insurance should not be bought and then thrown in a drawer and forgot about . If there is a living named beneficiary , the life insurance will not be affected by the will or the estate settlement .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
You 're referring to what 's known as an `` Accelerated Death Benefit Rider '' -LRB- also commonly referred to as `` Living Needs Benefit Rider '' or simply `` Accelerated Benefit Rider '' -RRB- . This rider is designed to allow a person to access a percentage of the proceeds prior to death if the insured person has been diagnosed with a terminal illness by her physician -LRB- some policies cite remaining life expectancy must be 12 months or less others may be 6 months or less - varies by insurance company -RRB- . The Accelerated Death Benefit Rider is included in most policies these days at no charge - if you 're unsure if it 's in her policy , you can contact the carrier to find out if it 's included in her coverage . Please note , when the rider is activated , there can often be a fee due for activation . The rider provides funds prior to death to be used for medical care , funeral arrangements , and other items and features an interest rate charged to the amount provided . Upon the death of the insured and a claim is made on the policy , the proceeds paid to the beneficiary will be the face amount less the amount provided prior to death and the interest generated from the loan . Another avenue is cash value if it 's a permanent life insurance policy -LRB- whole life or universal life insurance -RRB- - this money can be borrowed against the policy as a loan . However , it 's expected to be paid back . Should the death of the insured occur prior to repayment , the outstanding balance and any interest due would be deducted from the face amount and the difference paid to the beneficiary . If she is not terminally ill and is in need of long-term care , then you would be looking to determine if she has a long-term care insurance policy in place or a life insurance policy with a long-term care rider and what the benefits are under those programs . If you 're unsure if there are any existing policies on her and are trying to determine whether she has any coverage in place , the Medical Information Bureau -LRB- MIB -RRB- may be able to help identify a carrier she has applied for coverage with in the past -LRB- however , I believe they can only go up to a 7-year look back -RRB- , but due to privacy laws , she may need to do that herself . If you have documentation noting your authorization to review her input , then you may be ok on that matter . Otherwise , you may need to review past financial documents to determine whether she 's been paying premiums for a policy -LRB- e.g. input can be found via her bank statements -RRB- . If you know what carrier she has her coverage with , you can contact them to determine whether any of the above items are available under her policy . Please note , you would need authorization to do so or at the very least have her on the phone with you - due to privacy laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is The Difference Between Life Insurance And Disability Insurance ?
Life insurance can be used to replace the income of the insured person after the insured person dies . Disability insurance can be used to replace the income of the insured person if the insured person becomes disabled.Disability can occur several times during one 's life ; death only occurs once .
Life insurance is a mortality product and disability insurance is a morbidity product . Life insurance pays a benefit to the policy beneficiaries upon the death of the policy insured . Disability insurance pays with the policy insured ca n't work because of sickness or injury . Buying term life insurance in tandem with disability insurance is part of defensive financial planning .
The main difference between life insurance and disability insurance is the first one is for those you love and care about to replace your income if you die . The second is to replace your income if you live . Life insurance is purchased for those you care about that would be left financially burdened with debt and or the lack of your income if you were to die today . Disability insurance is purchased for you to replace the majority of your income in case you were so injured or ill you could no longer work . Unless you are independently wealthy , there is a really good chance you need to purchase both . Be sure and find an experienced independent life and disability insurance broker to help you shop the market for the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
The difference between Term Life Insurance and Regular Life Insurance -LRB- whole or universal life -RRB- is somewhat like the difference between renting a home and owning it . When you rent you are paying to have access each month but you have no ownership and are building up no equity in the property . Term Life insurance provides a death benefit for the term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- . If you are still alive at the end of the policy 's term then the policy expires and the insurance company keeps all the insurance premiums you have paid over the term the policy was in effect -LRB- unless you pay extra for a `` return of premium '' rider on the policy -RRB- . Term Life policies do not build up any cash value . Regular/Permanent Life insurance policies , while more expensive , can build up cash value over the years that are a financial asset to the policyholder . A Regular/Permanent Life insurance policy can also be paid up , this means at some point no further premium payments are required and yet the policy remains in effect until the death of the policyholder . This is a very high level and simplified description of the difference between Term and Permanent Life Insurance . I usually recommend that people have a combination of permanent and term life insurance over the course of their lives . As each person 's situation is unique , you should seek out an experienced life insurance agent -LRB- preferably an independent agent who represents multiple life insurance companies -RRB- to help you determine what your needs are and to design the policy or policies that will best meet your needs .
There are several good disability insurance companies in the market place . Besides the premium differences between companies , you also have differing policy definitions on disability benefits . Add to this `` Own Occ , '' which covers specific vocational skill sets like a brain surgeon . Different carriers also offer short and/or long term disability insurance polices that can also make a difference from carrier to carrier .
Depending upon your point of view , one could say that virtually all major health insurance carriers are equally good or bad in today 's marketplace . The health insurance industry has been highly regulated at the state level for decades and with the Affordable Care Act we have an entirely new set of Federal regulations for health insurer 's to comply with . So , yes , CIGNA offers excellent services . So , do AETNA , Assurant , Humana , United Healthcare and scores of other options around the nation . Defining how `` good '' CIGNA is versus any of its national competitors is a subjective exercise that means different things to different people . In the new health insurance marketplace of 2014 the informed buyer will have to understand that the insurance carriers have to devise different ways of covering up to $ 6250 in potential financial exposure per person in different plan design configurations and price points . The insurance carriers has to come up with their own ideas as to how to have plan designs that fit into the new `` Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum '' allowed by the law . Right now that can translate into some very meaningful benefit plan design differences between insurance carriers and within the same `` metallic ' tier level . You may have one insurance carrier offering only high deductible plans while a competitor may offer some plans with different office visit and/or prescription copayments and yet they both fall within the range of being qualified `` Bronze or Silver '' plan designs . Upon examination they will find that the various carrier 's first attempts at plan designs have yielded results that are often confusing , inconsistent and can be make it even more difficult for the non-insurance person to see the value differences between various carrier 's plans . This is where you start to come to those intersections of Price , Benefits and Network that help drive a person 's buying decision . At certain price points and for certain of their plan design 's overall benefits , CIGNA can offer some of the best coverage for the dollar in today 's marketplace . The are a nationally recognized brand with an large , national provider network and a growing offering of value added programs designed to keep their members healthy or effectively manage the chronically ill . While no one can say that any insurance carrier is the `` best '' in each and every way and every location . CIGNA strives for a consistency across the large number of various insured populations they serve . I can feel comfortable in saying that CIGNA should be part of your consideration in the individual and large group market segments .
In order to determine what plan is best for you , I would need to know more about you such as your age , gender , any tobacco usage , married or single -LRB- determines availability of a household discount on rates -RRB- , medical history -LRB- if outside open enrollment period -RRB- , and other factors to provide accurate figures and suggest a proper course of action that best serves your needs . For the overall populace , the most comprehensive -LRB- and most popular -RRB- Medigap plan is plan F as it covers all Medigap benefits at 100 % . Plan G is the second most popular plan because it 's identical to plan F except it does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . So how do you decide between the two ? It comes down to price . Since Medigap policies are standardized -LRB- meaning a plan F from company A is the exact same plan F from company B -RRB- , the only difference between the coverages is the price you pay for them . With the only difference between plans F and G , if the annualized premiums total more than a difference of $ 147 , then plan G offers you the better deal - if the total is less than $ 147 , then plan F is the better deal . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions , including quote requests , plan comparisons . Thanks very much .
The most popular Medigap plan is Plan F because it 's the most comprehensive and covers all of the benefits at 100 % from day 1 . Plan G is the second most popular plan because it 's identical to plan F except it does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- , but the premiums are typically much lower than plan F . So how do you decide between the two ? It comes down to price . Since Medigap policies are standardized -LRB- meaning a plan F from company A is the exact same plan F from company B -RRB- , the only difference between the coverages is the price you pay for them . With the only difference between plans F and G , if the annualized premiums total more than a difference of $ 147 , then plan G offers you the better deal - if the total is less than $ 147 , then plan F is the better deal . In order to determine what plan is best for you , I would need to know more about you such as your age , gender , any tobacco usage , married or single -LRB- determines availability of a household discount on rates -RRB- , medical history -LRB- if outside open enrollment period -RRB- , and other factors to provide accurate figures and suggest a proper course of action that best serves your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions , including quote requests , plan comparisons . Thanks very much .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately there is no simple answer to your question . Medicare supplement policy costs vary based upon a person 's age , sex , geographic location , and the particular insurance company whose policy you may be considering just to name the major variables involved . So , assuming you are getting ready to turn age 65 the cost of a Plan F policy could vary by more than $ 100 per month just depending upon the insurance carriers selling policies in your local area . Trying to compare costs for a Plan F policy between a states , for example the difference between a Plan F in Mississippi and a Plan F in New York could be even more radically different . Seek out a qualified health insurance agent who can quote multiple Medicare Supplement carriers and have them show you quotes from the carriers available in your local area . You will be surprised at how much of a variance in premium there can be between insurance carriers offering the same coverage .
In 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level plan -LRB- approximately 70 % coverage level and the most common plan design purchased -RRB- was $ 328 per month . This cost , in the overwhelming number of cases , will increase for 2015 plan year rates . As this is a national average figure and health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state , between regions within a state , and between different insurance carriers , it is only the roughest approximation of what health insurance might cost you . Your age and tobacco use status , plus the health insurance plan and insurance carrier you select are the primary factors in determining what your specific individual health insurance rates will be . Finally , whether or not you fall within the income ranges where you would qualify for some degree of an advanced premium tax subsidy will also factor into what your final monthly cost for individual health insurance would be .
The average price for home insurance can vary greatly based on several factors . If two different people applied for the same level of coverage on the exact same property , their prices could be different , based on how similar the applicants were . The primary factors that are considered for pricing home insurance include the age of the applicant , the occupation or education of the applicant -LRB- if the insurance company offers discounts for affinity groups -RRB- , the number of adults living in the residence , and the claims history for the applicant . And this is assuming we are looking at two applicants for the same property . There are factors that adjust the price based on the differences between properties as well , so the same person applying for two similar properties may receive higher or lower premiums based on the rating factors for the residence . For example , if the property has a pool , whether the pool is fenced or unfenced , the proximity to a fire hydrant , the age and type of roofing materials , and so on . Most policies I write for Home Insurance come out to be between $ 60 and $ 120 a month , depending on the level of coverage selected . But since every customer is different , and two homes on the same street will get different rates , I always recommend contacting a licensed insurance professional to obtain quotes . It 's best to get at least 2 or 3 quotes and compare both the premium amounts and the type of coverage . Do n't just buy based on price alone , or you may wind up with less coverage than you need .
Individual health insurance , per the requirements of the Affordable Care Act after January 1 , 2014 , is sold on a community rated basis . This is a much different method than has been used by the majority of states and so while it would have been difficult to answer your question in the past it 's virtually impossible now . You are simply going to have to get some quotes . Factors such as your state of residence -LRB- and where you reside within a state -RRB- , your and any covered dependents dates of birth , the number of covered dependents under 21 and the number over age 21 , the tobacco use status of you and/or any covered dependents , are all factors applied when calculating an individual health insurance rate . Obviously , these factors are unique for each person 's situation , that 's why no one can just say `` it will be $ 500 per month '' . You can do some online searches , you can go to the websites of health insurance carriers , you can even go to Healthcare.gov to get some ideas of what different plans , from different carriers , with different provider networks , and vastly differing rules will cost you and cover . And you may figure out correctly if you would qualify for any subsidy in the government marketplaces . Or , you can look health up a qualified health insurance broker , tell them your information and what you are looking for in general terms and they will do all the work for you , explain the subtle and not-so-subtle differences between different individual health insurance carriers , and help you make an informed decision . All for the same price as doing it yourself . For help please feel free to visit my web site .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
Best is a word that means different things to different people . To one , it 's lowest premium . To another , it 's highest coverage . The most popular plan is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It 's the highest level of coverage you can get . But a Plan G will save you more money than a Plan F 100 % of the time . This is because the only difference between the plans is a $ 146 deductible that is not covered by G . But the premium to go to F over G is always between $ 200 to $ 300 more per year .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
What is the difference between workers compensation and disability insurance ? Actually the differece is where you are at the time the disability . Workers Compensation Insurance covers you for at work activities , mainly accidents . Illness with worker 's comp is much harder to prove . Disability insurance is your off the clock , accident AND illness coverage .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 1 1/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Short Term disability Insurance pays a percentage of your salary if you become temporarily disabled , meaning that you are not able to work for a short period of time due to a sickness or injury -LRB- excluding on-the-job-injuries , which are covered by workers compensation insurance -RRB- . A typical short-term disability insurance policy provides you with 40 to 65 percent of your pre-disability base salary , according to the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners estimates that these benefits generally last between three to six months . Most short-term disability insurance policies have a `` cap '' , meaning you receive a maximum benefit amount per month . Short-term disability insurance policies also have a limit on the amount of times that you can receive benefits-up to two years , according to the Insurance Information Institute . .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Where Is Car Insurance Mandatory ?
That is a great question ! Car insurance is required in almost every State in America . Even in the ones that do n't , you have to be able to prove that you can pay for damages caused in an accident . If you are looking for the state with the least requirements , it used to be New Hampshire , but that may have changed since I lived out east . It is safe to say that it is required almost everywhere that you can go . It makes sense to have it , and can be devastating to you if you do n't . Thanks for asking !
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
If you happen to live in a state where it is mandatory that your car policy includes coverage for primary medical benefits , then that portion of the claim must be handled by your car insurance company first . Once those benefits are exhausted , the claim may then be turned over to your medical insurance provider . States where such coverage is voluntary as opposed to mandated , if you choose to carry medical coverage on your car policy , it would work exactly the same way .
Car insurance is mandatory in all states -LRB- I assume -RRB- . However , you can also provide financial responsibility in many areas . This is when you provide proof that you have sufficient funds to pay a certainamountof damages in the event you were held liable for an incident . Personally , I do remember writing an article earlier this year about car insurance in Alaska . From recollection , there are areas in that state where car insurance is not required .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
Life insurance is not usually mandatory or by law such as car insurance and now health insurance . The exception would be if you were ordered by a judge in a court case such as a divorce or child custody case . The other situation causing life insurance would be a contractual agreement . Some examples of a contractual life insurance agreement would be a secured loan or a business partnership agreement known as `` buy sell life insurance '' . Other than these types of special arrangements life insurance is not considered mandatory , but if someone you care about depends on you for care or finances then out of responsibility you should carry life insurance . Remember life insurance is not for you , it is for them .
Generally speaking , probably not . Most States require you to have at least a mandatory minimum amount of Liability Insurance in order for a car to be registered . Your Car Dealership will need to obtain proof of that coverage from your Isurance Professional in order to register the car for you , so without such proof , they ca n't really do anything to complete the deal . In addition , unless you are paying cash for the car , it will either be financed or leased and in both cases , there are requirements to have both Comprehensive and Collision coverage on the car and , in the case of a lease , the required amount of Liability coverage which is somewhat more than any State 's minimum requirement .
The best answer that I was able to locate is fromaskdeb.com . Here it is : Car insurance polices actually evolved from maritime insurance hundreds of years earlier . The policies were to cover any losses and damages that might occur to property that was transported by ship . When the automobile was invented , these marine policies acted as a blueprint for car insurance . The first car insurance policy offered only liability coverage to protect any property that might be damaged by a motor vehicle . This first policy was written by an English insurance company back in 1895 . In the U.S. , the first liability car insurance policy was not written until 1898 and the first policy holder was a Dr. Truman J. Martin . It wasnt until 1927 that Massachusetts became the first state in the U.S. to pass the first mandatory insurance law .
If car insurance is mandatory , there are two possible entities that make it so - either your State Department of Motor Vehicles or your auto loan or leasing company . Usually these days it is both . Most states require car insurance as part of their procedure for registering a car . In all cases if you have a loan , the lender will require you to carry both Comprehensive and Collision coverage in order to be sure that their interest is protected . If you are leasing your car , not only will Comp and Collision be required , but Liability coverage as well .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
As Mr. Harris indicates , car insurance is mandatory in all States . Mandatory auto insurance limits vary by State , however . The specific limits for your State can be found on your particular State 's Insurance Commissioner website or by simply searching the web for auto liability limits , with the name of your State . Limits vary from $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 / $ 10,000 in Florida -LRB- Yikes ! -RRB- to $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 55,000 in Wisconsin . The first two dollar amounts are for bodily injury from an accident and the third amount is for property damage to others , from that accident . For example : Using Wisconsin limits , In an insured driver 's liability situation , the policy would pay no more than $ 50,000 to any one injured person but no more than $ 100,000 , no matter how many people were injured . So , if three people were injured and two of them received $ 50,000 each , the third injured person would not be collecting from the policy , since the $ 100,000 limit would have been exhausted . As for the property damage to others , the policy would pay no more than $ 55,000 in total to one or more claimants . .
Every state is a bit different however In Colorado , where I am located , car insurance is mandatory for all drivers . Auto insurance is enforced by the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies which is part of the Department of Insurance . Colorado was a no-fault state until 2003 , when they changed the regulations to what is referrd to as TORT meaning fault has to be established first before claims will be paid .
Purchasing life insurance is not mandatory , unless it is stipulated in a contract you sign or a loan that you take out . Of course , the insurance company will also decide if you have an insurable interest , allowing you to purchase coverage . But in the vast majority of situations , buying life insurance is not mandatory .
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
That is a great question ! The answer is one of those , `` no , but you should '' answers . Like health insurance is n't mandatory , having it is very wise , and not having it has penalties . It iskind of like that with your prescription coverage . While it is n't mandatory to have , the cost of your prescriptions without it is often prohibitive . A prescription that Medicare covers may only cost you a couple of dollars , that without the coverage would cost $ 45-50 dollars or more . On a fixed income , and looking at stretching a retirement fund , I 'd wholeheartedly recommend that you enroll in the plan . Thanks for asking !
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
Auto insurance is mandatory here in Ohio . As an Ohio broker since 1980 -LRB- Has it been that long ? -RRB- , we help consumers meet the mandatory minimum liability requirement in the most affordable way . By shopping multiple companies , consumers can view and compare the lowest rates . Also , keep in mind that it is always a good idea to consider liability limits higher than what is legally required . Although youthful rates can be a bit expensive , as you get older , rates typically reduce quite a bit . This is an ideal time to review your existing coverage . Ironically , the Ohio state minimum limits were recently increased from $ 12,500 / $ 25,000 to $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 . It had been quite a while since the limits were increased .
Excellent question and one about which there is much confusion these days . As a general rule , most health insurance policies do not cover routine eye exams -LRB- this would be different from an eye exam required to diagnose and/or treat a medical condition like Macular Degeneration -RRB- . Many employers and a growing number of individuals insure their vision care needs through separate Vision Insurance policies that do cover eye exams , lenses , frames , contact lenses , etc. . Where things get more confusing , and sometimes frustrating for the consumer , is in understanding some of the new benefits mandated by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . One of these mandatory benefits is that coverage for pediatric vision and dental be included in health insurance policies sold on or after January 1 , 2014 . So , you may be paying for a vision benefit that only your children can use and if you have no children you are paying for a benefit you , as an adult , can not use . The consumer should not assume that even if their new ObamaCare compliant policy is in place that this will translate into effective coverage for your dependent children . Each insurance carrier has designed their benefit plans differently in regard to the vision & dental requirements . Some make it an upfront benefit similar to vision insurance coverage you may have seen in the past while others require that the major medical plan 's deductible be met before such services would be reimbursed . So , if you have a Bronze plan with a $ 6000 deductible you technically have some vision coverage for dependent children but no effective coverage until you have met the $ 6000 deductible first . Buyer beware is my advice and the consumer should carefully research this benefit area in the various health insurance options you might be considering . This is another example of where an experienced and knowledgeable health insurance broker can be invaluable in helping you select the health insurance plan best suited to your needs and budget .
If you are in a mandatory insurance state , a currently datedinsurance ID should be kept in the car . If a driver of the car is stopped by law enforcement and can not provide proof the vehicle is insured , there will likely be a fine assessed the driver . If you do n't have current ID , most insurance companies provide internet access to obtain one or your insurance professional can send you one .
Both Obamacare and car insurance are mandatory , but there is a big difference in how the mandates get enforced . The Affordable Care Act enforces the mandate through a fee which is collected by the IRS . State and local jurisdictions can enforce the mandate for car insurance through traffic fines . A police officer will routinely ask a motorist for their driver 's license and insurance card .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Face Amount Mean In Life Insurance ?
The face amount of the policy represents the face amount the policy is scheduled to pay out . In the case of a graded death benefit the policy will pay a reduced amount for the first 2 or three policy years before going to the actual face amount . Some companies pay dividends . These dividends can be used to buy additional insurance thus increasing the death benefit . But dividends are not guaranteed Should you die the beneficiary would receive the Face amount of the policy plus any paid up insurance accumulated by the dividends . In the case of a Universal Life policy , the policy would pay the face amount plus if you choose you can have the death benefit increased by any cash value accumulated in the policy . Because of the nature of Universal Life you need to make sure you are paying sufficient premium to keep the policy in force , otherwise the policy would lose the death benefit entirely . Always read your annual statement if you have a Universal Life policy .
The face amount means the amount the policy isinitially based on . It does n't always equal the death benefit because during the first two or three policy years , some policies will only pay a % of the face amount . Other policies will grow and pay higher amounts as the policy grows .
Two great responses so far ! The other angle I would put on the question is that the `` Face Amount '' is the amount the insurance company promises to pay based on the contract that the insured or owner of the policy agreed to or entered into with the insurance company . For example , based on a term policy contract , if the insurance company promises to pay $ 250,000 of death benefit if the insured dies while still covered by the insurance , the beneficiary will receive $ 250,000 when the claim is paid . The `` Face Amount '' is $ 250,000 . Based on a permanent policy -LRB- for example -RRB- , the the insurance company promises to pay $ 250,000 of death benefit minus any outstanding loans against the policy . If the insured dies while still covered by the insurance , but had utilized -LRB- borrowed -RRB- $ 25,000 from the policy , the beneficiary will receive $ 225,000 when the claim is paid . The `` Face Amount '' is still $ 250,000 , but the contract has wording that describes how much the beneficiaries are paid . -LRB- In some cases it can be `` more '' than the `` Face Amount '' based on gains in the contract and/or dividends . -RRB- There are numerous examples that could be listed , but between all of our answers , I sure do hope that helps you understand a bit more , and highlights the assistance that a qualified licensed insurance professional can offer you !
The face amount in life insurance means the amount of insurance you buy . The death benefit is the amount that is actually paid to the beneficiary when death occurs . The face amount almost always equals the death benefit in term insurance . In permanent insurance , the death benefit may be higher or lower than the face amount , depending on if the policy had strong growth , if there was a loan on the policy , and other reasons .
There is a little more to it than that . The face amount is the original benefit amount once the policy is full benefit . The death benefit can change but the face amount does not . For instance , if someone buys a two year graded policy with a $ 10,000 face amount , the policy may only pay $ 3,000 death benefit if they die in the first 12-months . It would usually pay $ 7,000 if they die in months 13-24 and would pay $ 10,000 -LRB- equal to the face amount -RRB- after the 24th month . Other policies are increasing death benefit policies . The death benefit grows each year but the face amount is always the original face . For instance a preneed funeral policy through a funeral home may start with a $ 10,000 death benefit AND a $ 10,000 face amount . But 15-years later the death benfit could be $ 15,000 and the face amount would still be $ 10,000 . Other policies have dividends that buy paid up additions . These can also increase the death benefit but the original policy face amount is the same .
1 -RRB- If by guaranteed life insurance you are referring to guaranteed issue life Insurance , that is coverage that can not be declined for health reasons . The policies usually have rather narrow age guidelines , low maximum face amounts , and are graded during the first 1-3 years for death due to natural causes . E.g. . If the insured person died of a heart attack during the first years of the policy , the beneficiary would receive a reduced death benefit -LRB- often return of premium , plus a little extra -RRB- . If death occurs after the graded period ends , the policy pays the full face amount . It usually pays 100 % of the face amount from day one for accidental death . Some guaranteed issue life insurance policy premiums are guaranteed not to go up for life . Some can go up every year , and others are in between -LRB- e.g. can go up every 5 years -RRB- . Keep in mind that you will want to be able to afford this policy in the years ahead , and get lifetime guaranteed level premiums , if possible . Guaranteed issue life insurance can be a good choice for people who can not qualify for any other coverage . Even if death is anticipated within the first two years , the return is better than any savings account . And people are often able to survive serious diseases beyond what is expected . 2 -RRB- If by guaranteed life insurance you mean life insurance where the premium and face amount are guaranteed , it simply means that the premium can not go up , and the face amount can not go down , for a certain period of time . In Term insurance , the guaranteed level period is usually for the term of the policy . In Universal Life , the guaranteed period can be for life , or it can be for a set number of years .
The life insurance payout is the usually the same as the face amount . Some exceptions would be if the cash value has grown beyond the face amount -LRB- increasing the face amount -RRB- , or if money has been borrowed from the policy and not repaid -LRB- reducing the face amount -RRB- , or if the policy was purchased with a decreasing face amount . The average face amount of policies purchased in 2010 was approximately $ 165,000 , which was down from the previous years .
Paid up life-insurance means you dont make anymore payments on the policy . You still get the coverage , but you no longer have to pay for it . But heres the question : suppose you wanted to keep paying ? Why wouldnt the insurance company allow you to do so ? I mean , some of these permanent insurance policies can get very cash rich . Whole life policies can pay some pretty hefty dividends . Universal life policies can apply a pretty decent interest rate . As I am sure you have heard , there can be some great tax advantages to accumulating wealth inside life insurance : tax-deferred accumulation , and , under the right circumstances , tax-free distributions . So why wouldnt an insurance company just let you go for it ? A number of decades ago , they did . People were taking out policies with face amounts of $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 , but putting huge amounts of cash into them . Huge amounts . They really milked the tax advantages of the product . Of course , the IRS got wise to this and imposed certain rules . These rules limit the amount of money that can grow inside these policies and still avoid taxation . You can exceed this limit , but then you get a tax bill . From this point of view , paid up means if you put more cash into the policy , you could create a taxable event . It also means something else , in consideration of the expenses of the policy . Lets say you take out a universal life product with a guarantee to age 100 . This means that given the proper payment schedule , both the premium and the death benefit will be guaranteed to a age 100 . The emphasis is on the payment schedule . If you meet it , then no more payments would be required to secure those guarantees . It would be paid up . Whats interesting here is that , depending on the product , a lot of flexibility exists for designing a payment schedule . You can have continuous pay and simply pay the lowest amount required annually . You could have a single pay in which just one payment in the first year will get you what you want . You could have a 10 pay , which means you just pay for 10 years - and still get the guarantees . You could have 20 pay . And so on . Depending on your cash flow and other factors , you could pay up your policy with any number of strategies . And then you simply would not have to worry about paying for your life insurance , even though you would have the coverage for as long as you need . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
There are a couple answers to this depending on what type of policy was purchased . With a term policy , the payout will be the stated policy face amount , less any monies used previously for terminal illness payout . With universal life type policies it could be face amount -LRB- less any terminal illness withdrawal -RRB- or face amount , plus cash values -LRB- less any terminal illness payment -RRB- Whole life depending on the type chosen and internal workings selected can either pay face -LRB- less terminal -RRB- or face plus additional paid up additional face amount earned over the life of the policy . Death benefits will also include any interest earned between date of death and date claim is paid . With cash value policies any outstanding policy loan values will also reduce the payout .
The face amount in life insurance means the amount of insurance you buy . The death benefit is the amount that is actually paid to the beneficiary when death occurs . The face amount almost always equals the death benefit in term insurance . In permanent insurance , the death benefit may be higher or lower than the face amount , depending on if the policy had strong growth , if there was a loan on the policy , and other reasons .
The face amount of the policy represents the face amount the policy is scheduled to pay out . In the case of a graded death benefit the policy will pay a reduced amount for the first 2 or three policy years before going to the actual face amount . Some companies pay dividends . These dividends can be used to buy additional insurance thus increasing the death benefit . But dividends are not guaranteed Should you die the beneficiary would receive the Face amount of the policy plus any paid up insurance accumulated by the dividends . In the case of a Universal Life policy , the policy would pay the face amount plus if you choose you can have the death benefit increased by any cash value accumulated in the policy . Because of the nature of Universal Life you need to make sure you are paying sufficient premium to keep the policy in force , otherwise the policy would lose the death benefit entirely . Always read your annual statement if you have a Universal Life policy .
When the word `` level '' is used in the context of life insurance , it usually refers to a guaranteed level premium , or guaranteed level face amount . This means that the premium or face amount will stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for a set amount of time . I recommend getting a level premium and face amount for as long as possible . 30 years is reasonably priced level term insurance for younger to middle aged persons .
The face amount means the amount the policy isinitially based on . It does n't always equal the death benefit because during the first two or three policy years , some policies will only pay a % of the face amount . Other policies will grow and pay higher amounts as the policy grows .
The face value -LRB- face amount -RRB- of life insurance is the amount of the proceeds to be paid out when the insured of a policy dies . If you have a term insurance policy , this proceed amount to be paid to the beneficiary is equal to the face amount . If you have a permanent life insurance policy with cash value , the proceeds to be paid out will be the face amount less any loans against the policy .
Short answer : You simply tell the insurer that you want to take a out a loan on your policy . The company will then issue you a check in the amount you request up to the allowed maximum that insurer allows . The rest of the story : Legally you are not required to pay back the loan . However , the insurance company is charging you interest on the loan - most charge 8 % . Over time the loan and the interest can eat up the cash values and make the policy implode - or default , or lapse . Whole Life policies are either ` include ' -LRB- most policies -RRB- , or ` exclude ' -LRB- rare -RRB- . What that means is that the cash value accumulation is either included as part of the face amount or it is excluded from the face amount . If it is excluded then the loan will not adversely affect the face amount death benefit ; but since most whole life policies are ` include ' the death benefit will be reduced by the amount of the unpaid loan and interest accumulated . Policy loans are a great way to cover unexpected emergencies , or college tuitions , or a new home down payment ; but I would not just arbitrarily borrow my cash values . That is not a good practice .
Life insurance policies pay out what is called the `` death benefit '' . When you buy a term policy , that is the `` face amount '' of the policy . The entire face amount of term insurance is paid to the beneficiary . When you buy permanent insurance , the death benefit may be reduced by the policy owner having taken out a loan on the policy , or using some of the face amount as a living benefit . Conversely , the death benefit for permanent insurance might be higher than the original face amount , due to the policy 's growth .
The face value of a life insurance policy is the amount of insurance that is purchased . The death benefit is the amount of money that is paid to the beneficiary upon death . For Term life insurance , only the face value is paid out upon death , because Term life insurance does not build up any cash value . Policies that can build up cash value , like Whole Life insurance or some Universal Life insurance , will pay the beneficiary the face value -LRB- original amount for which the policy was taken out -RRB- plus whatever cash value has built up in the policy and not been depleted through loans , to make policy payments , etc. .
Paid up value in life insurance is a non-forfeiture provision which is found in most classic whole life insurance policies . Non-forfeitureprovisions are a series of values found within a life policy that give you options if you want to stop making premium payments on your policy . These options are : Cash Surrender : Giving up or selling your policy back to the insurance company for the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy over the years you own it . These values are stated on a chart called Non-forfeiture Provisions contained within your policy . Extended Term Insurance : This provides for the continuation of the full face amount of your policy for a specified period of time based on the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy . The length of time is stated in the same chart listed as non-forfeiture provisions . Paid-up Insurance Value : This provision also is included the the chart of Non-forfeiture provisions and it lists the new face amount of insurance you can elect if you stop making premium payments for the policy . It is based on the cash surrender value of the policy at the time you stop making premium payments . Depending on the length of time the policy is in force this amount may equal the full face amount of the policy , and this amount will be in force for the rest of your life . There are policies that can be purchased with a date where the policy is fully paid up , such as a 20 year payment life , or a life paid up at age 65 . Generally these policies spread a lifetime of premium payments over a shorter period of time making the premium payments slightly more than a traditional whole life policy where premium payments are paid for the life of the insured , and are typically known as a limited payment life policy .
When life insurance is paid up , it simply means that no further premiums are required to keep the policy in force . The policy may have been set up to where you only needed to pay a single premium in a lump sum . Or it may have required that you paid premiums for a certain number of years , and then it became paid up . In any event , you owe no more premiums and your beneficiary would receive the full face amount or more , if you passed . Or you may have decided to quit paying on the policy early , and were given theoption to take it as a reduced paid up policy . In this case , the face amount will be less than what you originally applied for , but the reduced face amount will stay in effect without you paying any more premiums .
Bottom line question : What is the best type of life insurance to have ? Bottom line answer : The type that is in force when you die.Keep in mind that life insurance is the only financial vehicle that provides an income-tax free lump sum of money to the one who depends on the insured person financially upon the trigger-point of the contract : the death of the insured . Focus on that death benefit or face amount . Do n't be distracted by cash values , living benefits , etc. to begin with . -LRB- That can come later -RRB- . As far as choosing a `` good life insurance policy '' , the answers are endless . But , here are a few basic parameters to guide you to the answer that is best for you :1 . Ask the beneficiary , `` What would you do if I -LRB- the proposed-insured -RRB- were to die today ? '' . `` Do '' is the key word . This is not a quantitative inquiry . It has to do with values . What matters most to the person you care about ? 2 . Then , `` what would be the negative financial impact to the beneficiary if I were to die today ? '' This is n't that hard for most people . It has to do directly with what the beneficiary believes they would do if the insured dies . For instance , if the beneficiary would sell the house , do n't put that into the equation . If there 's debt , do put it in the equation . Income replacement is typically the most important . But , it may not be if there are no children and the beneficiary has a career . See ? It all depends on what the beneficiary would do . 3 . Once the amount is determined , my suggestion is to first buy a permanent plan of insurance that would cover final expenses . That does n't have to be a large face amount . But , it should be big enough to take care if immediate funeral and burial costs projected to mortality age .4 . Cover the rest of the need with low-cost , guaranteed level premium and fully convertible -LRB- exchange all or part of the term to a permanent plan of insurance without the need to medically qualify -RRB- term.Now you can discuss bells and whistles . But , only pay the extra amount those cost if -LRB- big if -RRB- they have value specific to your situation . An experienced agent who actively listens -LRB- let 's you talk more than s/he does -RRB- can guide you .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Does One Get Renters Insurance ?
To get renters insurance you must contact an agent who is licensed to sell Property and Casualty insurance . Any agent who sells home and auto insurance is licensed to sell renters insurance . You should seek out an agent who will show you policies from numerous carriers so you can determine which carrier is the best match for you .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
Renters insurance is about the same rate with all carriers . The average renters policy in Montana is bout $ 100 a year with $ 30,000 worth of contents and $ 100,000 in Liability limits with $ 5,000 in medical pay and a $ 500.00 deductible . Most carriers are between $ 10 to $ 15 a month . The only advantage in choosing some carriers is that if you already have an auto policy with the same carrier then it can lower your auto insurance . Example I have a client that has a carrier in our agency for her auto but they carrier does n't let agents sell the renters policy you can only get it online . But what she did was get the renters policy online for $ 100 a year but it lowered her car insurance $ 80 every 6 months hence it was almost like getting paid to have the renters insurance . I would talk to your local agent and see if they have any package deals since renters policies are so inexpensive but well worth the investment .
I agree with the coverage part of answer one , however , if your renters insurance is only $ 10 a month I would question how much coverage you are actually getting . Why pay for something that will not protect you when something actually does happen ? Questions to ask your agent are : what they are basing their recommended coverage amount on ; if your property is covered only if it is inside your home -LRB- some companies offer world wide protection - if you 're on vacation and the airline loses your luggage for instance -RRB- ; how any valuable items such as jewelry or art , are protected - they should be scheduled on your renters policy otherwise they are only protected up to certain limits . And yes definitely look into bundling renters and auto for an additional discount !
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Are Life Insurance Claims Denied ?
Life insurance companies issue contracts . There are requirements for the company and there are requirements for the customer . If the customer commits suicide in the first couple of years most companies can , by contract , deny the death benefit . If there has been an attempt to defraud the company the claim can be denied . Very few claims are denied . Law suits often accompany a denial .
In addition to the excellent explanations offered by the other agents on this page , life insurance claims are sometimes denied due to the nature of the policy . If you purchase a graded policy , it will pay a reduced benefit for death due to natural causes during the first 1-4 years . With that type of policy , death due to accident will usually pay 100 % from day one . Sometimes accidental death is actually caused by a health condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack while driving a car -RRB- . When the claim is denied , it can come as a surprise because survivors were not aware that the policy was a graded during the first two years , and/or that the root cause of death was determined to be natural vs accidental . The same is true for people who think they are buying life insurance , when they are actually buying accidental death insurance . You need to be very careful about what type of policy you are getting so that your claim is not denied simply because you purchased the wrong type of policy . A final , common reason for denial of claims is late premium payments . In our office , we spend a lot of time each week reminding people whose policies have entered the grace period , that they need to pay their premium or lose their coverage . But many agencies due not send reminders , and it is easy to lose track of addresses , phone numbers , and email address of clients because people change those frequently in today 's society . At the very least , keep your address up to date with the insurance company so that you will receive any late notices and keep your policy in force for the time of need .
When a claim is denied , it 's usually because the death occurred within the first 2 years of the policy -LRB- known as the contestability period -RRB- and it 's discovered the applicant intentionally lied on the application to get the coverage or the insured person committed suicide . Once the contestability period expires , however death occurs , the policy will pay out a death benefit . Other situations where there may be a payout may be denied is if death occurred form an act of war or there was an exclusion rider on the policy -LRB- e.g. aviation exclusion for recreational pilots -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance claims are usually not denied , especially if the policy has been in force for over 2 years . If a policy has not been inforce for two years , a claim may be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . Which means you did not disclose fully something that could have affected the underwriting of the policy . Not declaring you were a smoker for example . Or if death is by suicide the claim will be denied if within 2 years -LRB- In Canada -RRB- If the policy is over 2 years old the insurance company has to prove fraud which is difficult to prove . If the policy contains exclusion such as death while skydiving , no coverage for that event . If you have any further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
If you were denied , health insurance the question we must ask is why were you denied coverage ? Depending on the reason and/or reasons why you were denied coverage , the next steps that you would take would be to look to obtain coverage through a different carrier or seek out a guaranteed issuance plan .
It really depends on the State you are in . In California if someone loaned their car to a friend and the friend caused the accident the insurance policy covering the car that did the damage is responsible to pay the claim if they were at fault . However there may be exclusions on the policy that could deny coverage . Without really knowing more it 's difficult to say in your situation . If a claim is being denied I would ask specifically as to why it is being denied . You can fall back on your own insurance to cover the loss to your vehicle providing you have collision coverage .
If you have had a claim denied and you disagree with the determination in the letter that was sent to you the letter will also have an explanation of how you should respond . Generally the letter would state you have 30 days to put in writing why you feel your claim should not be denied . State all the facts clearly then mail the letter in to the address on the letter sent to you and your rebuttal will be reviewed . If you are still denied but feel you are right and the insurance provider is incorrect in their assessment you can write to your states department of insurance and they can look into the matter . I also highly recommend you discuss the matter with your agent .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
There are a variety of reasons why life insurance would be denied to a potential insured applying for coverage : Medical issues , no financial justification , the recreational activities are too dangerous , there is no insurable interest , the travel destination during the next two years is too dangerous , the driving record is too egregious , drug abuse , vocation hazard , etc. . There are reasons that a death claim would be denied like fraud or suicide in the first two years . In the first two years after the policy has been kept in force there is a contestability period for suicide , misrepresentation and fraud . Keep in mind that certain life insurance companys death claim due diligence processes may continue after the two year contestability period based on some forms of fraud and criminal activity surrendering the insureds death . If it feasible that a life insurance company to experience financial problems , fall into receivership of the state -LRB- a form of bankruptcy -RRB- and affect claims paying ability .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
Great question ! A better one would be why would you want to risk living in one ? In almost every case , if an insurance company finds that there were laws being broken in the event that causes the claim to be filed , they will delay , or deny the claim pending an investigation of the circumstances . If it turns out you were living at great risk for a claim in an apartment that you should n't legally have been in , I 'd expect them to be slow to pay , and quick to deny . Please rethink your idea of living there , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Usually , upon presentation of proof of death and a claim form , the claim is paid . However , a claim could be denied , depending on circumstances . In Canada , a claim within the first 2 years could be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . This essentially means you did not tell or disclose the truth on something that would have changed an underwriting decision . After 2 years you would have to have committed fraud which is much more difficult to prove . A life insurance contract should be approached as a contract of utmost good faith where all parties give full disclosure . In other words , be sure and tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth . Suicide within the first 2 years or last reinstatement would also cause a claim to be denied . If there was an accidental death rider , then that portion of the claim would not be paid unless the death is deemed accidental . . Laws are similar , but vary by jurisdiction . You should check the wording in your policy , your local insurance act and , if necessary , a lawyer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
When and if your home insurance claim is denied , it is important to read the denial letter and associated explanation . Primarily , one should read the policy contract and truly understand the mechanics of the coverage and why the claim is not covered . The claims representative will be happy to help guide you through the policy and find the section -LRB- s -RRB- of the policy corresponding to the issue at hand . This is also an appropriate time to speak to a licensed representative with your insurance company and inquire as to whether there is an endorsement available to offer coverage for such a claim in the future . Licensed insurance representatives are generally not allowed to discuss an ongoing claim , this is the job of the licensed claims department . When speaking to a licensed representative of your insurance carrier , your questions must be based on coverage and not claims . Insurance agents are charged with the responsibility of explaining available coverage and endorsements ; they are not permitted to interpret coverage relevant to claims adjustment . For general advice or guidance , you may contact a licensed representative toll free at : -LRB-877-RRB- 931-3368 or contact your insurance carrier directly .
That is a great question ! A better one is why were you denied ? There are extremely few reasons why you could be legally denied , and I 'd sure like to know what their reason was . If they said `` pre-existing condition '' , you do n't want to insure through them anyway , as they are breaking the law , and probably are n't very trustworthy in their other dealings either . Count them as doing you a favor , and reapply with a different company , preferably one under the www.heathcare.gov site , where you might even qualify for help paying for the policy you 'll get . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Yes you should and actually must be listed . You are a part owner of one of the vehicles for one and live in the house . You could actually have a claim denied for not being listed on the policy and living in the household . Permissive driver coverage applies to non household persons , not residents . This is bad advice by the agent and you could wind up in a very bad situation . Get listed on that policy ASAP or find another agent who will correctly write the policy . You hear horror stories of insurance companies denying claims . Well this is why .
If you applied for Health Insurance and your application was denied , the company you applied to will have to give you a reason why it was denied . They should mail you a letter stating a reason . Since the Affordable Care Act was passed you can not be denied based on your health history , so as long as you are providing truthful , relevant info on the app , getting health insurance should be easy .
There are many reasons why a claim may be denied . If you smoke cigarettes but apply as a non-smoker is a very common one . If you did not disclose your health history properly your claim can be declined . The good news is that if your life insurance policy is over 24-months old , it is non-contestable . So the claims have to be paid . Also many people try to file claims on term life insurance policies that have already ended . Those claims will never be paid .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Does Borrowing From Your 401K Work ?
This is pretty simple actually . Borrowing from your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- involves filling out a form indicating how much you would like to borrow . If the money is available , they you will get a check in that amount . Because this is a loan , payments would most likely be set up taken from your current paycheck if you are working . There is interest you will pay back as well however you are paying yourself back . If you withdraw the funds , you may have a tax liability to pay for , fyi .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 59 1/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
Borrowing against a 401k is both a yes and no answer as to debt . No it is not traditional debt as showing against your credit score or debt to earnings ratio , because you are borrowing your own money . It is debt as Jim mentioned , because it must be repaid within 9 months . The tax and penalty consequences are much worse than borrowing the money from a lender . It is never advised to borrow from your 401k because you are borrowing from your own future . A simple rule is if you need money today while you are able to earn an income , you will need money when you are old and sick and ca n't earn an income .
This is a pretty difficult question to answer in a forum like this . I highly recommend that you speak to a professionalone-on-one to completely evaluate your needs and to see if you can borrow - and if so , if it would be financially smart to borrow from a retirement fund . Feel free to contact me if you have no one else . To give you a little idea if you could however , here are some guidelines : Most retirement funds are NOT AVAILABLE to borrow from . If you have a Defined Benefit or a Cash Balance Benefit , you can not borrow from it . You can move your funds to a different account , with professional guidance to avoid penalties . But with these types of accounts , you usually can not touch until you retire . If you have a Profit Sharing account or a 401K - you MAY be able to borrow depending upon the rules of the company that it is through and/or the rules of the company you work for . Again , however , most will not allow you to borrow . If they do , typically you can only borrow 50 % of YOUR contributions -LRB- not what your company contributes -RRB- or $ 10k , whichever is less . Again , this is a very difficult and technical topic to get a solid answer here . Look me up if I can be of any further help .
That is a great answer ! One of the nice things about having a 401k is that ability to borrow from it . You will need to get with your plan administrator and request the loan forms that you will need to complete and return . A word of warning , though . Borrowing from your 401k has some danger . Should you lose your job for any reason , that balance borrowed very quickly becomes due in full . You can also slow the growth of your funds , which can have a huge impact on the long term growth and payout of your fund . While the money in the fund is an option , it may not be your best one . Please speak to your advisor first , okay ? If you do n't have one , you can contact me , I 'll help if you 'd like . Thanks for asking !
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 59 1/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 59 1/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 70 1/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 59 1/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
That is a great question ! The answer is simple . Anything that you borrow , and must repay , is considered to be debt . In the cases where you borrow from yourself , -LRB- 401K loans , life insurance loans , etc. -RRB- it 's easy to think that it is n't really debt , but consider what happens if you do n't pay it back . If you were to lose your job , your 401k debt becomes immediately due in full . Your life insurance loan , if not repaid , can eventually cause the policy to lapse , and eventually cancel . A good financial rule is if you borrow it , it 's a debt , and needs to be repaid . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
401K plans have been one of the primary ways people who work save for retirement . It is what is known as a qualified plan meaning that it is subject to government enforced rules and regulations regarding how money goes into it , how much can go in , how it comes out and how much at one time . Employers offer these plans and agree to put in a certain amount -LRB- in some cases , not all -RRB- so that an employee can grow their nest egg while working . The funds grow tax deferred -LRB- no taxes due till funds are distributed to employee -RRB- , typically have options as to where you will invest them and traditionally accumulate over time . You can ask your employer about their 401K plan if they offer one . You usually have to work with them for a few months or a year before you beome eligible to join .
Can you borrow money from a retirement plan ? It 's going to depend on the plan that you are participating in . Since the term borrowing is involved , I will assume this is about borrowing from a 401k plan . The ability and the reasons allowed for borrowing are set by both government and administration of the plan . The government has some straight forward situations where loans can be granted . What a retirement plan committee can do though is add acceptable reasons for loans . The question becomes even if loan provisions are offered , should you use this as a source of loans ? Only as a last resort . Even though you get to pay yourself back at low interest , you have removed money from your investment pool that could earn more than a low interest rate . So you could be losing money by doing this . Then if for any reason you separate employment the loan balance is immediately due . and could be considered a distribution subject to penalty . Last choice .
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 59 1/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
That is a great question ! There are some good reasons for borrowing from your 401k , and some bad ones . The good reasons are that they are typically fairly easy to get , and often at much lower interest rates than a commercial lender would give . And depending upon the structure of your 401k , in some cases , the interest that you pay is to yourself , so there is less loss on the loan itself . The bad reasons are worth considering . The worst is what happens if you are let go , or leave the job before the loan is paid off . In many cases the loan has to be repaid within a short period of time , may have serious tax consequences , and that 's not even considering what the withdrawal of the funds may do to the earnings power of your 401k if it 's not structured correctly . The best thing to do is speak with your plan administrator , or HR person , and find out the details of taking out a loan and what the terms are . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
These are two very different products that serve 2 different purposes so it ca n't be said whether one is better than the other . 401k 's are generally funded to be used for retirement savings purposes that can be accessed during your senior/retirement years . During your working life , many employers will offer to match all or a portion of the funds you place into your 401k -LRB- varying on a number of factors -RRB- . The intended purposes of whole life insurance are to create large sums of money quickly in the event the insured dies . It 's typically used as a form of protection to pay off debts -LRB- so your family is not burdened with those expenses -RRB- , provide income to a surviving spouse , leave a legacy to the insured 's loved ones , etc. . While whole life insurance does build cash value that you can borrow against , it 's actually creating a loan against the policy and is expected to be paid back -LRB- interest would be charged like you would have on a loan from a bank -RRB- . Cashing out a policy can be done , but you lose the protection of the life insurance and you may be subject to surrender charges and/or taxes on any gains -LRB- cash value amount is higher than total premiums paid into the policy -RRB- . When you buy life insurance , you 're buying it for the purposes of the death benefit protection - it 's not typically considered/used as an investment/retirement savings vehicle .
That is a great question ! If what you are asking is something along the lines of `` I had this job once , with a 401k , and I left the job , does the 401k still exist ? '' , the answer is yes , it does ! It may be hard to find if the company is n't around anymore , but it does still exist in some financial institution that is overseeing it . Start with the company HR department if they still exist , or hunt up the bank that used to do your paychecks , you might get lucky . If that does n't work , try your Secretary of state , it should be on file who they used . Thanks for asking , and happy hunting !
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
How is a Roth better than a 401k ? Well it 's not a matter of better , it 's a matter of different . Both a Roth and 401k give you tax deferred savings , they just differ on when taxes are applied . A 401k allows contributions to go in pre-tax and grow tax deferred . When those funds are withdrawn they are income and subject to taxes in what ever bracket you 're in . A Roth does the opposite , you pay taxes on your contribution and it grows tax deferred , then distributions from your Roth are done without any tax implication . So the question of one over the other is do you think taxes will be higher or lower when you begin to withdraw funds ?
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Car Accident Injuries ?
Health insurance covers car accident injuries and injuries from just about everywhere else . There may be a deductible or coinsurance that may have to be met before the claim is paid . If you have car insurance , your benefits may be the primary coverage , and therefore pay before the health insurance pays the claim .
OK , this will be a quick run down of coverages most commonly needed but the answer may vary some form state to state : The first coverage you need is Bodily Injury Liability . This is the amount of coverage you need to protect yourself from the claims and law suits of people you injure . The second but related coverage is the Property damage coverage for property you destroy . So it is common in the US to sell them in groups such as 100/300/100 . Now what does that mean : The first number is critical . This is the per person limit of bodily injury liability . Insurers are not stupid . They know that in 75 % of all accidents , there will be one person in each vehicle -LRB- it is just the way Americans drive -RRB- So , there is a lot less likelihood of hitting that 300,000 but it would take injury to more than one person to do it . So the odds are with your insurer . Another way to buy insurance -LRB- usually about 10 % more in cost -RRB- is through Combined Single Limits coverage , CSL gives you one bulk sum to pay the claim more as the accident happened rather than based on the sub limits of your policy . So split limits are the norm , but for a little more you might want combined single limit coverage . The next coverage is usually PIP or Medical Payments . Both of these sort of compensate for usually minor events for which the party is injured and you want to take care of the injury regardless of fault . For example you give a ride to a friend who slams the door on his finger . Yes it was his fault , but it was your car and you do n't want suing you over this . Your policy responds with either medical payment or Personal Injury . PIP is usually broader and often includes wages loss which Med Pay does not . The next group of coverages are usually the most important on your policy . These are your uninsured or under-insured motorist coverage . In about 14 % of accidents the at fault party will have no insurance . And in the next grouping of the accidents you will see coverage of the at fault party at state minimums or not much more . . Now you need the protection of UM coverage . A good rule of thumb is never buy less UM than you have for Bodily Injury Liability . This is now you protecting yourself , your family and passengers in your car . It is perhaps the most little understood coverage and most important part of your policy.Lastly as respects UM/UIM you need Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Property Damage at a level commensurate with the ACV of you car . Next come the coverages on the physical damage to your car . The coverages are Comprehensive or also called OTC or Other than Collision . which covers many perils such as theft , fire , flood , trees falling on the vehicle etc. . Collision occurs when you hit something such as a tree , a road curb , a pothole , another vehicle etc. . This is where the value of your car is a consideration . You should also select a deductible that is right for you and your household budget From here we go to many ancillary coverages including Rental Reimbursement which is usually stated as a dollar limit for thirty days -LRB- enough time usually to get your car repaired -RRB- > The coverage is triggered by another cause of loss such as collision . The next and perhaps last coverage to consider for the general public is towing or as some companies offer road side assistance . Towing is just that towing . Whereas roadside service is usually sign and drive towing , run out of gas , lock out of car etc. . Now if you have a new car you might want replacement coverage or if leased gap coverage for loan or lease . If you do n't understand any of this gives us a call , We believe an educated consumer is better for every one .
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
There are 4 major potential losses that your auto policy protects you from : Bodily Injury , Property damage , Personal Injury , and physical damage to your vehicle . Let 's take a quick look at these . Be advised that I 'm speaking specifically for the state of Michigan . Your state may be slightly different . Bodily Injury - In Michigan if you injure someone in an auto crash , you can be sued for : Wrongful Death Disfigurement Loss of Bodily Function Loss of Wages These lawsuits are big dollars . Be sure you 're carrying high enough limits to protect your assets Property Damage - If you cause damage to property with your car , you can be sued to repair or replace that property Personal Injury - This is an injury to the driver and any passengers in the car . In Michigan , there is unlimited lifetime coverage for this . Check in your state for it 's specific limit . Physical Damage to your auto - This is the coverage that will fix your car for a covered accident . One last item I 'll cover is Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverage . This is a coverage you carry that will pay you if you are injured in a car accident and the at fault driver either has no insurance or not enough to pay what you 've won in court . I did n't touch on things like towing or rental reimbursement as I did n't really think that was what you were asking , but those coverages are also available as well as some other small , specialized coverages . the auto insurance policy is a complicated animal and you need an agent you can trust to be sure you build the right coverage in a way that you can afford it .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Car insurance is important to have for a number of reasons , the big one being it 's generally required by law ! But if that is n't enough to convince you , here are some other reasons it 's important to have car insurance : 1 -RRB- Car insurance protects YOU . Your bodily injury and property damagelimits determine how much the insurance company will pay if you are sued . So , if you have bodily injury limits of 50/100 , your insurance company will only pay $ 50,000 per person and a total of $ 100,000 per accident . If the amount you are sued for is $ 350,000 , guess who is paying the rest ... 2 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your PASSENGERS . What if you are in an accident , the OTHER driver is at fault , but they do n't have any or enough insurance ? That is when your insurance can help again , IF you have uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage . This coverage is similar to the bodily injury/property damage coverage already discussed , but this coverage is to protect you and your passengers in case you are hit by an uninsured or underinsured motorist . 3 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your CAR -LRB- and your wallet -RRB- . If you have Comprehensive -LRB- or Other than Collision -RRB- and Collision coverage on your car , then your car can be repaired and the repairs will be paid for by the insurance company , minus your deductible . This coverage is generally required ONLY if you have a loan or a lease on the vehicle , but it could be a good idea to sit down with your insurance agent and see if your vehicle should have this coverage .
The short answer : it can cover civil liability if it arises out of negligence due to the driver . Your third party coverage , which is usually denoted as bodily/physical injury are your limits for injuries to other drivers . For example , many people have $ 100,000 / $ 300,000 split limits for bodily injury . This means that your insurance company will cover $ 100,000 per person and $ 300,000 total per accident . Depending upon your policy , attorney 's fees are either included in this limit or have a separate limit . If included in the limit , legal defense expires once the insurance company has paid out the total amount of the policy -LRB- i.e. $ 100,000 per person or $ 300,000 for the accident -RRB- . A good way to avoid being left with huge attorney fees is to either purchase much higher physical injury limits or get an umbrella policy . The umbrella will kick in after you have used up your physical injury limits and cover you up to the stated amount of the umbrella policy . Again , keep in mind that you will only be covered if your negligence is covered within the policy .
Auto insurance can provide you protection from physical damage and liability losses depending on the amounts and types of coverage that you choose . The basics for auto insurance coverage options are bodily injury -LRB- this is normally injuries that another person sustains when you are involved in an accident and deemed responsible -RRB- , property damage -LRB- damage done to property from an auto accident that you are deemed responsible for -RRB- , medical payments -LRB- amount available for your medical treatment when involved in an accident -RRB- , uninsured motorist -LRB- coverage that provides for damages when you are involved in an accident with an uninsured motorist -RRB- , under-insured motorist -LRB- this coverage comes into play if you are involved in an accident and the responsible party for the accident does not have enough coverage to provide for all of the damages caused by the accident -RRB- , other than collision `` comprehensive '' -LRB- this is physical damage coverage for your vehicle typically less a deductible -RRB- , and collision -LRB- this is a physical damage coverage for your vehicle typically less a deductible -RRB- .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
When you are renting a car , look at the following coverage options : 1 . Liability - make sure you opt in for the 3rd liability insurance . This will cover other party physical damage and injuries in case of an accident . 2 . Car Physical damage - this is the coverage for the vehicle you rent . Usually it bears $ 0 deductible and covers from a first dollar on . 3 . PIP - or personal injury protection - if you drive with other people seating in car , this will provide coverage to your passengers . Other optional coverage offered by rental companies may include : 1 . Personal property : luggage , cellphones , computers etc. . Usually limited to a set by the rental company amount . 2 . Death : provides limited coverage for accidents involving death of passengers in the rental car .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
I can only think of two institutions that actually require car insurance . First , if the state in which you live and register your car has a law that imposes such a requirement in order to register it . Second , if you buy a new car with a lien or lease a new car , the financing company will imposes requirements for insurance . Now , that having been said , it still makes good sense to buy car insurance even if either of those two reasons are not imposed . Car insurance protects you in the event it is stolen , damaged in an accident or otherwise affected . But further , it provides important financial protection in the event you cause an accident and are held liable for any injuries or damage that result from that accident .
Firstly , we hope your son continues to recover and has a full and speedy recovery . Our thoughts and prayers are with him . If you are injured in an automobile accident , and you have minor or significant injuries , nearly all companies will pay for the medical expenses , up to the stated limits of the policy that is providing coverage . Medical payments coverage , although optional , is covered on nearly all policies in `` fault '' states . If the driver of the other car is at-fault , they are required to carry specific minimum limits of bodily injury . Typically it is between $ 15,000 and $ 30,000 per person . If it is a `` no-fault '' state , PIP -LRB- Personal Injury Protection -RRB- is typically required and will pay for the damages , although it does not matter who was at fault . Lost wages would also be covered . If the other driver has no car insurance , then uninsured motorist protection of the driver of your vehicle can step in and pay . If your driver is not covered , you can utilize your healthcare coverage or begin litigation against the driver . IMPORTANT : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the leading US car insurance brokers with more than 30 years of experience . His award-winning website Carinsurancezoom.org provides free online quotes and offers the lowest auto insurance rates from the most reputable companies .
In most states , you are required by law to carry auto insurance if you own and drive a car . The mandatory coverages are usually bodily injury and property damage liability as well as personal injury coverage . This is to be sure that , if you get into an accident , there is money to pay for any damage to persons or property as well as any injuries sustained in the accident . Coverage for damage to your car is normally an optional coverage although it may be required by a finance company or leasing company . A good agent can help you chose the right coverage for your particular situation . Find an agent you can trust and follow their advice . You 'll be glad you did .
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Health insurance covers car accident injuries and injuries from just about everywhere else . There may be a deductible or coinsurance that may have to be met before the claim is paid . If you have car insurance , your benefits may be the primary coverage , and therefore pay before the health insurance pays the claim .
That can be a problem on a few levels . There is , of course , the obvious . If you have a car and no insurance , then if it is damaged in an accident or stolen for example , you pay for your own loss . Without insurance , if you cause an accident , you 'll also pay for the damages and poossibly injury to the other person and their car . Needless to say , in either case , you are out quite a lot of your hard earned money . But here is another problem you will have . CT , like many states require car insurance in order to register a car . If you cancel your insurance , eventually CT DMV is going to catch up with you and the fines can be pretty stiff . Bottom line , the best advice for saving money is to buy and maintain quality car insurance protecting you for the coverage you need .
Your personal or group health insurance policy will pay for injuries from a car accident . Keep in mind that a deductible and coinsurance may be applied before benefits are paid . Another factor would be the coverage on your own car insurance -LRB- assuming you were insured -RRB- or the coverage on the other driver 's policy , assuming the accident was their fault . It 's possible that the primary insurer -LRB- the company that will pay benefits first -RRB- may be the car insurance company . An experienced broker can help you determine what is covered and how/when it will be paid .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Things To Look At When Buying Health Insurance ?
Excellent question ! You essentially have 3 main variations on the theme when purchasing ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance ; 1 -RRB- Conventional plan designs with office visit & prescription copays and lower deductibles -LRB- pretty pricey these days -RRB- 2 -RRB- High deductible health insurance plans designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- or a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- - becoming more common . 3 -RRB- Plans that fall in between , here you may see a plan with office visit copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , plans with prescription copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , or plans with more moderate deductible levels with all services subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance requirements but that also do n't meet the IRS requirements for being an HSA eligible plan . Simple , right ? First , determine if the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use are in-network providers for the plan you are interested in . Second , review you health and your history of health care consumption . Your needs and usage at 27 will probably be much different than when you are 47 . Try to pick a plan that you believe will meet your needs in the coming year at the best value . Determine if the plan you are interested in allows for direct access to specialists or whether it requires you to be referred out by your primary care physician first . Neither approach is bad but you should understand how you are supposed to access care in order to maximize your benefits and minimize your costs . Ask what your coverage is when you are outside of your immediate area . Increasingly you may find that you only have emergency care outside of a plan 's `` service area '' or perhaps no coverage at all . Do you have special needs ? A chronic illness or injury that requires ongoing treatment or expensive prescription medication requires extra homework . For example , some health plan 's pharmacy benefits cover HIV/AIDS medications at the lowest level -LRB- to them , highest for you -RRB- possible . Finally , compare monthly premiums . The lowest monthly cost , while always attractive , many not really be the lowest annual cost for you once you factor in some or all of the issues I have pointed out above . It may be worth another $ 50 a month in premiums to have a prescription copay instead of a deductible of up to $ 6300 to meet before your expensive medication is covered .
Globe Life is an A + rated insurance company by A.M. Best so their financials provide a stable outlook . One of the big attractions that people look at with Globe Life is the $ 1 for $ 50,000 campaign you see on flyers that come in the mail . No exams , limited health questions , and it can be issued in just a few days . It sounds like a great deal , right ? The important thing to look at when buying any coverage is the structure of the policy and the premiums that you 're paying throughout it 's life rather than just what you 're paying for the first month because chances are ... you 're going to live longer than 1 month into the policy . Some policies offer level premium guarantee periods -LRB- e.g. you 're paying the same premium for 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , or 30 years before the premium can go up , or you 're locking it in for life with a GUL or WL policy -RRB- . Other policies feature banded coverage meaning the premium may be cheaper up front than level premium policies , but they go up when you hit the next age bracket in it 's structure -LRB- typically every 5 years -RRB- . A banded policy can sound like a great thing for the first few years , but if you keep it for a long time it will likely become much more expensive and the cumulative premium that you 've paid can/will be a lot higher than what you would have paid under a level premium policy . When it comes to insurance , sometimes taking a more conservative approach to things can be more advantageous for you in the grand scheme of things than the short pluses you may get in the present . Often times people will buy a cheap policy just to have some coverage and the face amount sounds like a lot of money , but the coverage does n't come close to meeting the needs . It 's always recommended to consult with an experienced broker before buying any coverage to make sure that what you 're looking at buying is suitable and will be the best deal for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
This is a great question that I was just answering last night with another client . The first and foremost thing that you should look for is an agent . Even though much of the world buys insurance over the phone , a local agent can help you determine what types of coverage you want and need and is familiar with the local area . Being familiar helps in determining the reconstruction cost vs the selling price vs the tax value . All three numbers are usually different . Most people do not want to be either under or over insured , and a local agent will help with that . The second thing to look for is the company writing the policy . You will never know how good your insurance is until you need it . When a minor claim happens typically every insurance company will be able and willing to pay the claim . It is when the catastrophic occurs that you really get what you pay for . Thousands of dollars and many hours can be wasted when your insurance company is unwilling to agree with you . This is also another reason to have local agent representation . Third and finally is look at what other coverages are available and discuss whether or not you want to buy those coverages or self insure . Some of my favorite must haves are : replacement cost on contents , increased construction costs and replacement cost on the home itself , a deductible that you can afford to pay tomorrow if needed , sewer back up if you live downhill of anyone , A-rated carrier , and local claims personnel . There are many more topics that need to be discussed and reviewed which is why my # 1 recommendation on what to look for when buying home insurance is a great local agent .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
It will depend upon what level of health insurance you purchase . Assuming you purchase major medical health insurance , it will now have to be in compliance with the Affordable Care Act . That said , what you may be purchasing can range from a `` Platinum '' level plan with very low out-of-pocket expenses for virtually all areas of health care to a `` Bronze '' plan that may not provide you any coverage at all until you have paid for more than $ 6000 in health care expenses out of your own pocket . One thing that is consistent across the four levels of health insurance plans now available -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum -RRB- is that a wide range of preventive health care services will be covered at 100 % with no cost sharing by the subscriber . Yes , you are also buying `` peace of mind '' that in the event of a serious illness or injury that your personal financial exposure is limited to that $ 6000 + number each year -LRB- which will increase in future years -RRB- and you also are now buying guaranteed access to health insurance with no pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . In the abstract I think everyone agrees that these are good things . However , depending upon your income level what you may be buying may or may not be viewed by the individual as affordable to them . Having recently completed the first open enrollment season under ObamaCare it has surprised me how many people , even ones qualifying for substantial subsidies of their monthly health insurance premiums , still elected to remain uninsured . Clearly , the perceived value proposition of what you get from buying health insurance has a very subject answer that varies greatly from one person to the next .
That is a great question ! One that is kind of hard to answer though , -LRB- to be best for you -RRB- without some more specific information . Things that would be helpful to know to give you an accurate idea are physical , like age , sex , smoking preference - smoking/non , health history , and family health history , for example . A 22 year old woman with no health issues would have different options than say a 44 year old man who smokes and has high blood pressure . Other things to consider are more financial planning type things - for example , do you have dependents that you wish to provide for , are you looking to just cover expenses , would you like to transfer wealth ? These are considerations that a good agent would want to cover with you . I 'd strongly suggest that you look up a good independent agent in your area -LRB- independent means they are not tied exclusively to a brand name , allowing them to have several companies to use for comparing -RRB- and walk through your scenario with them . You are certainly welcome to contact me , I would be happy to help if you would like . Think these things over either way , so that you have answers , and set an appointment with an agent or two before you decide . I 'm sorry that I could not give you a solid number , but it would not have been the right thing to do . Thank you for asking !
That is a great question , and I 'm glad that you asked it , because the answer is one that many people should know . Life insurance is one of those things that you should have help buying , because there are so many things to consider when looking . Being denied for a policy will hurt you when you look for the next . That is a big red flag among insurance companies . The bad thing about many of the TV advertised or mailed policy offers is that the questions on the application seem simple enough , but the small print is where you get denied . Please always seek out an insurance professional , to help you find the right policy for you . If you need help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help , okay ? Thanks for asking !
A lot of it depends on personal preference and what your concerns are . If you want to make sure it 's with a top-rated company who is financially strong and stable , you want to look at what their rating is -LRB- e.g. A.M. Best ratings : A , A + , and A + + indicate superior financial ratings -RRB- . If you 're looking at permanent , long-term coverage , you may want to look at the most stable companies because you want them to be there for the next 50 , 60 , 70 , years . If you 're only looking for a 10-year term insurance policy , you may be willing to look at a company with less favorable numbers because their rates are cheaper . It can also be helpful to look into reviews that people say about the company - positive aspects , any major continuous issues with claims , etc. ? The other major thing that everyone looks at is pricing - your premiums that you pay . There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' life insurance policy . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . This is because people may qualify for different risk classes -LRB- one of the single-most critical things to think about with coverage -RRB- , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies and make sure that the policy you apply for is best serving the desired needs that you want to have the coverage in place to protect .
That is a great question ! People buy insurance to protect things . Health , their car , and their belongings , we buy policies to protect all of these things . We buy life insurance for the same reason - in this case , to protect those we love and leave behind from being left without the money to care for themselves , or provide for our funerals . We buy it to protect our peace of mind , knowing that our loved ones wo n't suffer the loss of their financial security , as a result of the loss of us . It 's one of the most important things that we can do for them . Thanks for asking !
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How to buy term life insurance ? '' Well , I say , when I go out to the brokerage market I want to see a brokerage house that shows as many carriers as possible and , believe you me , there are hundreds of term life insurance companies . I want to look at their premium price because they vary between first place and twentieth place . It could be 20 percent premium , so you definitely want to shop it . The second thing , who is the most benevolent underwriting company ? Who is going to give you the best possible offer based on your medical history and your paramed exam that you 're going to need to take with the application . To me it 's really important when you 're looking at buying term life insurance to make sure you cover the period that you need to have , that you already settled in your mind that is a temporary coverage need and you do n't need permanent . When you 're looking at term , it 's price and your underwriting offer that you 're going to get from your carrier .
That is a great question ! There are a lot of great companies out there to buy a policy from , and several that cater specifically to our Elder Citizens . There are some things that might help you weed out a few of them , like the financial strength of the company , -LRB- look for A to A + ratings by A.M. Best or Standard & Poors -RRB- , their main product line -LRB- If they are known for auto repairs , or lobbying for Elder Citizen rights , they may not do their best work on insurance , though they will have policies available to purchase . Be very careful to understand all of the details , and fine print before you buy one , please ! -RRB- , and their track record with your State 's department of Insurance -LRB- Look for complaints or citations -RRB- . The best thing to do is look for an independent agent who can do all of that work for you , and help you find a policy that is right for you . Thank you for asking !
When youre asking what insurance do you need when you retire , we need to know if youre asking about Health Insurance or are you talking about protecting your family from loss . If your question pertains to your health insurance because most of us loose that when we retire then you have two options . You can look at either a Medicare Supplement , which works similar to car insurance and what I mean by that is you can buy a plan with no deductible and pay a higher premium , that will cover all of your doctor and hospital expenses or you can assume part of the risk and pay a lower monthly premium with a deductible or co-pay and it will still cover your doctor and hospital expenses . Medicare Supplement will run you anywhere from $ 155 to $ 200 per month so around 2-3 thousand dollar per year to see your doctor 4 to 5 times a year . Some people like this option because their monthly cost is set even when they have a bad health year . The other option you have is to look at a Medicare Advantage plan if its available in your area . Most plans have either low or no monthly premium and small co-pays when you see your doctor or are hospitalized . All plans have a maximum out of pocket to protect you for bad health years so if youre like the average senior and you see your doctor the 4-5 times a year , your health insurance cost will run you under $ 100 . If you were asking about insurance to protect your family from loss then the answer get more complicated because we have to look at what insurance you already have in place , if you have a pension are you looking at taking a full or partial , do you have a 401K , if married when is your spouse going to retire and if it would be better to take their social security now or wait . With out knowing the answers to some of those questions answering that question would just be a blind shot in the dark .
Great question ! The things to look for are pretty much the same things that you want in your health insurance - the lowest cost , for the most coverage , with the lowest deductible . Everyone understands lowest cost , for the coverage , you want to look for the more things that the policy will pay for , the better . The deductible is the amount that you have to pay out of your pocket before the insurance money kicks in , so the look for the lowest deductible , highest coverage that you can afford . If you need more detail , feel free to contact me , I 'm glad to help . Thanks for asking !
Here are the most common things people look for when buying life insurance from us . 1 -RRB- Price . They are looking for the best price for their health , age , tobacco status , etc. 2 -RRB- Exam . They want to compare policies with and without exam , and decide whether or not taking an exam is worth it for them . The majority of those who look into No Exam coverage do go ahead with no exam because : a. it is all they can get ; b. it is less risky and not much price difference than a medically underwritten policy ; or c. they need the policy in a hurry and are willing to pay extra to not take an exam . 3 -RRB- Length of Coverage : Most people who are not well versed in life insurance are concerned what will happen when their term ends and `` what happens to their premiums '' . When looking for life insurance , a shopper has to understand how different types of policies work , and the agent needs to take the time to make that explanation clear to them . 4 -RRB- Guarantees : They want to know if the premium will go up , if it will pay for death by any reason , if there is a guaranteed cash value , etc. 5 -RRB- Company Stability : They want to be sure that their life insurance company will pay out upon their death .
That is a great question ! While they may also look for other things , as a rule they will look for these things : Your sugar levels , for diabetes ; cholesterol/triglycerides for heart disease/stroke risk ; drug , alcohol and tobacco use -LRB- both illegal and legal drugs -RRB- ; chemicals that show kidney health and liver health ; proteins that show cancer risk ; HIV and hepatitis . All of these things help validate the truthfulness of your answers , and assess their risk insuring you . Great question , thanks for asking it !
Great question ! The easiest way is to go to the webpage of the company that you want , and follow the prompts on the page . I 'd really warn you about doing that though.Some things are safe to buy online - tickets , books , things that are `` what they are , '' and you know for certain what you are buying . When it comes to important financial investments or decisions , you do not want to leave them to an impersonal webpage , that will not look out for you , or care about your best interests . When it comes to protecting your family , it is best to have a live agent that can explain in detail to you what you are buying , and if there are alternatives that may better suit you . Please take my advice and go to a live agent first , someone who can give you a solid price , and a better understanding of your risks and alternatives . If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help you . Thanks for asking !
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Every company has their own markers that they look for when underwriting a policy because they each have their own underwriting guidelines they follow . When you take an exam for a life insurance policy , you usually have a blood test and urine test in addition to the health questions and vitals check . For older individuals , the carrier may ask you to complete an EKG as well -LRB- seniors may also be asked to complete a mature assessment - this looks at cognitive and mobile abilities -RRB- . Common things carriers look for in these tests are cholesterol levels , A1C levels -LRB- A1c is your blood sugar control - in short , a check to see if someone is diabetic or are already diabetic and have good control -RRB- , liver function studies , kidney protein levels , any nicotine , to name a few things . There are other values that carriers look at in the results , but they will vary by carrier . If you 're uncomfortable taking an exam , there are non-medical policies available , but you will pay a higher rate -LRB- in short - it 's compensation to the carrier for taking on more risk since they wont have a full review of your medical history to underwrite the case with -RRB- . I would recommend consulting with an experienced broker before applying for any coverage to review your options and see what will work best for your program . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Renters insurance the first step you need to do is look at all your belonging tv clothes and personal items and look at what the replacement value is what it would cost if you lost everything and had to buy it all over again . Many do not realize of how much it would cost to replace most of our things since we have gather all that stuff over the years . Granted you ca n't put a price or a value on something such as photographs and things that your child made you but your other things can be quite costly to replace . The average renters contents to replace is30 to 40 thousand if you have to replace everything . As far as the cost of a policy goes the average 100 to 140 a year . Depending on your Liability limits . and if it is a full replacement cost for the coverage of your contents
Several reasons , some pretty straight forward and some you may not have given thought to . First is the misfortune of losing a child . What will you do ? Will you need time ? Will you need money to purchase the things you and your spouse want to for the child ? Can you turn to your spouse and say `` No , we ca n't aford that headstone , let 's get something cheaper . '' ? While it is easy to have an answer when not faced with the situation . It 's another thing to live through losing a child . Now for the positive . Locking permanent life insurance in for a child gives them the best price at the lowest cost when they are in the best health . The opportunity to build cash values over a long period of time is pretty good . The other thing you can do with a child 's policy is buy future insurability options where your child can increase their insurance later in life without medical underwriting at the same class . What these future options do is `` take away '' an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child later in life when maybe their health is not so good . This feature alone is more valuable than most imagine . I have insurance on my kids , never thought of a good honest reason not to provide it for them . It covered them while they grew and gives them a headstart as adults . It 's a positive thing to do .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Medicare Advantage Plan Is Best ?
The best Medicare Advantage plan is the one that fits your needs and budget . One of the biggest mistakes our seasoned citizens make is enrolling in an Advantage plan based on the premium . Many plans have a $ 0 premium which can be attractive but also financial suicide . If you have chronic health issues a Medicare Advantage plan is probably not your best choice .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage plans are technically a Medicare replacement plan . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in traditional Medicare . Rather you are enrolled in a privatized form of Medicare . Your doctor , if they participate in the Medicare Advantage plan you chose , will file claims with your Medicare Advantage plan , not with Medicare . There is no `` best '' Medicare Advantage plan . The one that meets your needs and budget is what is best for you .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For some people Medicare Advantage plans are an excellent senior health insurance solution . I believe at last count we were in the 13 to 14 million seniors participating in Medicare Advantage plans . As with most every choice in life there are tradeoffs involved . Medicare Advantage plans are essentially HMO plans for Medicare eligible seniors . They offer a broad , comprehensive range of benefits and value added services and wrap everything up in one package . The flip side to Medicare Advantage plans is that their enrollees operate within the plan ` scontracted network of providers to receive their care . This does , by necessity , impose some restrictions on their member 's choices in doctors , hospitals , pharmacies , etc. , and this environment is not for everyone . That said , changes in the American health care system , some but not all prompted by ObamaCare , are also working in ways that make it more challenging for traditional Medicare enrollees to find and/or keep health care providers that accept Medicare . So , whichever way a senior citizen decides to go they will probably be faced with some difficult choices and compromises . Medicare Advantage plans vary from one insurance carrier to another . One ca n't objectively say that Medicare Advantage plans are , as a class , a better or worse choice than traditional Medicare plans . That is a determination that each individual has to make for themselves based upon their perceptions of their present and future needs . Certainly Medicare Advantage plans are an option that a senior citizen should consider but the important thing is that people have a choice .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Just a point of clarification to the + Larry Gilmore response ... Medicare Advantage plans replace original Medicare . A Medicare Advantage plan does not `` fill the gaps in Medicare '' . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in original Medicare so any `` gaps '' in coverage are paid by you , the Advantage policyholder . Medicare Advantage plans have many moving parts including deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance . A large claim or numerous medical expenses will almost always result in much more out of pocket expenses under an Advantage plan than you will experience with original Medicare and a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan .
Humana 's Medicare Advantage product is a Medicare HMO or Medicare Managed Care plan and I would presume you are trying to compare it to Medicare Supplement policies . In general terms , most doctors are n't thrilled with Medicare regardless if it is traditional Medicare or the new Medicare Advantage products sold by insurance carriers such as Humana or United Healthcare due to the reimbursement -LRB- payment -RRB- levels set by the government . You provide no specifics so it is impossible to give you a definitive answer . Medicare Advantage products have to cover everything Medicare covers and generally offer an even broader range of benefits to their members . However , the trade off from the consumer 's perspective with Medicare Advantage plans is that you must stay within their network of health care providers for your care to be covered . From the health care provider 's perspective they are almost certainly presented with a different payment methodology under a Medicare Advantage plan than the fee-for-service approach they have been used to and they will find their practice of medicine under greater scrutiny for the quality and effectiveness of the care they deliver . In my experience these types of physician remarks usually boil down to manner of payment and control issues . You should find a licensed health insurance agent who sells both Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage plans who can explain the specifics of what each approach does and present each one 's advantages and disadvantages . Your doctor could be giving you good advice for your particular area or they could be expressing their own prejudices .
Medicare Advantage Plans are more feature rich than original Medicare . First , there is no out of pocket maximum under original Medicare . Medicare Advantage Plans have a Maximum out of pocket , usually between $ 3500 and $ 7000 , depending on the plan you choose . You also have copay 's which help you plan out your health care expenses . Original Medicare pays 80 % of the approved part B charges . Most Medicare Advantage Plans have Part D built into them , so you do not have to pay for a Prescription Drug Plan . Medicare Advantage Plan also provides extra benefits not covered by Medicare . The premium for a Medicare Advantage Plan can vary but there are still some $ 0 premium plans available that offer a great value .
The short answer is that it depends on what you are looking for . Most Medicare Advantage plans have either $ 0 premium or very little premium per month . Everyone likes free or is it really free ? One of the biggest things to look for in a Medicare Advantage plan is the `` max out of pocket cost '' which can be as high as $ 6,700 per year . There is also a network so you would need to make sure you see doctors within that network . The benefits on the plan can change from year to year as well as the network itself . The best thing to do is to compare a Medicare Advantage plan and a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap plan -RRB- to determine what is best for you . A Medicare Supplement plan will have a monthly premium , however , the `` max out of pocket costs '' can be zero or close to it . There is also no network and the benefits ca n't change with a Medicare Supplement plan . A lot of people who have a Medicare Supplement plan like the idea of being able to budget monthly for the expense and not have to worry about a big medical bill coming unexpectedly . Contact an independent agent that specializes in Medicare plans and they will be able to review all your options with you .
This is a Medicare Advantage Plan offered by Aetna . Several companies offer Medicare Advantage Plans . Medicare Advantage Plans are compensated by Medicare to administer claims . They will pay instead of Medicare . As a result most Medicare Advantage Plans offer more benefits than Original Medicare . There is also far less out of pocket exposure . Medicare Advantage Plans , unlike Original Medicare , will have a network of doctors that you must utilize , similar to the networks under most group plans .
Medicare Advantage plans are quite different from a Medicare supplement plan , also known as Medigap . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer in original Medicare . Your health insurance is covered by a private insurance carrier . Medical providers file your claims with your Advantage carrier , not Medicare . Most Advantage plans have networks you are required to use if you want full coverage . Some Advantage plans provide OON -LRB- out of network -RRB- coverage but with higher deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance . HMO Advantage plans typically have no benefits when you use a non-par provider . With original Medicare you have the freedom to use any doctor , hospital or other medical provider anywhere in the country . There are no networks . Medical providers file claims with Medicare . Once Medicare adjudicates and approves the claim it is forwarded on to your Medigap carrier so they can pay their portion .
I do n't think is a matter of `` need '' for a medicare advantage plan , but a matter of choice . Would a Medicare Advantage plan be a better choice compared to a supplement or going with just basic medicare ? It is wise to compare these options and how they will effect you . As Ted has noted , there are some advantages to Medicare Advantage plans that make them very attractive as a choice to a consumer . So , it might be better to consider a simple basic difference between Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage , Medicare `` rights '' . When you purchase a Medicare Advantage you are assigning your Medicare rights to that organization and commit to service -LRB- outside of emergency -RRB- to that organization as they become your Medicare provider . A Medicare Supplement does not restrict the insured to any one location or provider . For some people , this is a very important issue and could be the deciding factor .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Medicare Part C , more commonly known as Medicare Advantage plans , is a privatized form of traditional Medicare . Insurance carriers become sub-contractors to Medicare and provide benefits for Medicare Beneficiaries . Advantage plans cover the same things as Medicare but the similarities stop there . Medicare and Medicare supplement plans are the same regardless of your state or zip code . Advantage plans differ by state and even within a state . Advantage plans have low premiums -LRB- sometimes $ 0 -RRB- and introduce deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance when you access medical services . Advantage plans also require you to use limited doctor and hospital networks .
I would definitely recommend it . Medicare has no out of pocket limit . If you come down with a serious illness this can be devastating , leaving you tens of thousands in debt in some cases . If there is a good Medicare Advantage plan in your area then you may want to consider that . Especially if a Medicare Supplement is unaffordable . The advantage would be : Medicare Advantage has out of pocket maximums , usually between $ 3500 and $ 6000 . Many Medicare Advantage Plans have no additional premium other than the Medicare Part B premium you already pay . Many also include Prescription Drugs at no additional premium . Yo have networks but if your area has a strong network then that is generally not going to be an issue . You would also have copay 's , usually between $ 10 and $ 20 for a primary care doctor . This makes your health care much easier to predict since under original Medicare you pay 20 % of whatever Medicare approves but you have no idea what that will be until you get your bill . There are also many affordable Medicare Supplements . I usually recommend the supplements if you can afford the premium . Find a good local agent who specializes in Medicare plans , both supplements and Advantage plans . A good agent will help you decide which will be in your best interests with no pressure
It depends a lot on what state you are in . Humana does have HMO & PPO Medicare Advantage plans . However , people often confuse what they know about health insurance prior to turning 65 with health insurance after they turn 65 . There are big differences . It is no longer about HMO or PPO . All Medicare Advantage , HMO & PPO are basically in the same category which is a Medicare Advantage plan . It really becomes a question of do you want a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- ? One of the great features of a Medicare Supplement plan is there is `` no network '' so you can go to any doctor or hospital in any state you want . If they take Medicare they will take the Medicare Supplement regardless of carrier .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What To Look For In Long Term Care Insurance ?
The premium paid is always measured by the value proposition of the policy . The policy provisions are extremely important and need to be defined to the satisfaction of the potential policy owner before the policy is purchased . Why ? Because claims are the true test of any morbidity product , especially with long term care insurance .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Medicare Benefits can pay for a lot of thing like critical access hospitals , inpatient rehabilitation facilities and long-term care hospitals but when a person goes from needing rehabilitation services to long term care or custodial care , thats when they draw the line . Its estimated that at least 70 % of people over 65 will need long-term care support and services at some point . The cost of these services can dramatically drain your retirement nest egg but the cost of a lot of long term care policies can also be just as fighting . A simple cost effective option for most families is to look at a short term care plan . The cost is substantially lower than long term care policies , the underwriting process is much easier and most policy can be put in force in under a week . If you has more questions on this topic please contact us at The Insurance Advisor , We protect and enhance your Retirement , Health Care and Accumulated assets , allowing you to secure your legacy and enjoy your life stress free
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Will I Be Drug Tested For Life Insurance ?
Not every life insurance company requires a drug test on every policy . Each provider has different underwriting criteria and rules . The policy size and your age at time of application determine the type of medical testing that may be required . A small policy may be simplified issue : just answer a short list of medical questions . A very large policy will require lengthier questions , along with blood and stool samples .
Medical underwriting seems to be disappearing . Companies can not justify the cost . When you buy a high amount of life insurance you can expect that the company will require a blood specimen . That would possibly detect drug use . Many insurers today are asking for a list of medications and based on that information they are able to formulate a good profile of you . If you are prescribed a drug that is associated with addictive behavior that could be a red flag .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
A drug test can be your best friend when you apply for life insurance . If you smoke pot on a casual basis , and have been prequalified for non-smoker rates , then a clean drug test on your insurance exam will prove you are true to your word . Let 's suppose you used cocaine in the last year under highly exceptional circumstances , and your broker was able to get you underwriting leniency from a carrier . Their offer would be contingent upon a clean drug test now . If you you still use drugs , then you should consider one of the simplified issue policies referenced above . The only problem is that the total amount of coverage for which you will qualify will be comparatively small . If you need more substantial coverage , then there is a small possibility an excess-market carrier will take you . These underwriting syndicates specialize in extreme risks .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
Yes , any life insurance company that requires a blood test , urine test , or oral swab in order to get a life insurance policy will test for the presence of illegal drugs and cotinine -LRB- an indicator of cigarette use -RRB- . This is called a medically underwritten policy . If using a No Exam policy , they do not require an exam and do not test for drugs , although they will usually ask about drug use on the application .
Some life insurance companies have been increasing their drug screening to the Drug 5 Panel/Drug 8 Panel in response to the increasing use of illegal drugs . The 5 panel drug test detects cocaine , PCP , marijuana , opiates , and meth/amphetamines . They also test for nicotine/cotinine and alcohol . No Exam policies do not conduct blood or urine tests .
Yes , all companies when using paramedical exams do some drug testing as part of the chemical analysis in the underwriting process . Some drugs will effect certain levels of function within say kidney function that will show up by pushing the level higher . Alcohol for example , a legal form of a `` drug '' if consumed too close to an exam will raise blood sugars , alter the kidney function numbers and a few other numbers like those involving the liver . That is why it is never a good idea to consume significant amounts of alcohol the night before a blood/urine test . It will skew the results . Then it is up to the individual to get a second test , at their expense to show the first test was off .
A drug test can be your best friend when you apply for life insurance . If you smoke pot on a casual basis , and have been prequalified for non-smoker rates , then a clean drug test on your insurance exam will prove you are true to your word . Let 's suppose you used cocaine in the last year under highly exceptional circumstances , and your broker was able to get you underwriting leniency from a carrier . Their offer would be contingent upon a clean drug test now . If you you still use drugs , then you should consider one of the simplified issue policies referenced above . The only problem is that the total amount of coverage for which you will qualify will be comparatively small . If you need more substantial coverage , then there is a small possibility an excess-market carrier will take you . These underwriting syndicates specialize in extreme risks .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Guardian life will test for Nicotine and Cocaine . These are the two most common substance tests that almost all insurers test for when they perform medical underwriting . Besides these two substances , most carriers -LRB- Guardian included -RRB- , do not test for other substances , i.e. drugs . If there are other drugs that you currently use and you do not disclose , you do run the risk of creating a contested life insurance policy if you should die within the contestability period .
This is very unusual but not unheard of and technically legal as I understand it . In my nearly 30 years of being associated with employer 's group health plans I have had many clients who require a drug screen as a condition of employment but I have never had one that charged a prospective employee to pay for it . Do they offer to reimburse you if you pass the drug screening ? Really a drug screen should only be the last step before you are hired or you are given a conditional offer of employment based upon passing the drug screen . With today 's technology $ 300 seems an excessive amount to be charged just for a drug screening , is there a credit check and criminal background check also included in this ? Traditionally such practices have been a cost of doing business for the employer -LRB- and these tests can be required of the employer if the have Federal or State contracts they have to comply with as part of their doing business with the government -RRB- and not passed onto a job applicant . Personally , I would look for employment elsewhere before I would pay a prospective employer for the `` privilege '' of getting a job offer . If they will pick your pocket up front like that I can only imagine what a delightful work environment they must provide .
Life Insurance companies must do a blood test for any amount over around $ 25,000 , although some groups allow up to $ 150,000 . The tests are to detect both legal and illegal drugs . If you are taking medications and do not disclose that , they will be found . This helps the carrier determine what your general state of health is . So assume that whatever the drug is you may be taking , it will be detected by the test . Even a week after you have taken that drug . Thank you . GARY LANE .
I am presuming that you are asking about tests for illegal drug consumption and not just prescription medications in general . As far as health insurance goes this is a non-issue . An applicant for health insurance is not subjected to any physical exams or blood or urine tests as a condition for being offered health insurance coverage . While in the past there may have been questions regarding illegal drug usage on a health insurance application that if answered truthfully by a drug user could have resulted in their being declined for coverage in the individual health insurance market we have moved past that now . As the Affordable Care Act prohibits medical underwriting and requires policies to be guaranteed to be issued regardless of pre-existing conditions there are no such questions to be answered now . Ironically , in the individual health insurance marketplace the only drug that you can be asked about and perhaps penalized for in the form of higher premiums is for tobacco use . No questions are asked about marijuana , cocaine or other drugs . This is different from applying for life insurance where in many cases a physical exam that may include drawing blood and/or taking a urine sample are part of the underwriting process . With the expanded number of states that have approved marijuana for medical usage and the outright legalization that Colorado and Washington are now experimenting with the life insurance industry is having to adjust to this changing legal environment in their underwriting practices . Different life insurance carriers are addressing the marijuana usage issue in different ways so there is no universal standard being applied to this issue and it is an area where a great deal of evolution is currently underway and probably will be for years to come .
Insurance companies typically test for drugs with bodily fluids such as blood and urine . In some cases they test hair , but that is rare . The length of time a drug stays in your body and can be detected by routine testing varies . Regardless , it is important that you are truthful when you complete your life insurance application . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Are My Auto Insurance Rates So High ?
Automobile rates are determined from several factors : If could be the company you are with . Be sure to shop around , What does your driving history look like ? If you have a record of events , this will increase your rates . Age . If you are a teenager , your rates will be higher than someone in there 30 's for example . Credit history . Some companies use this as a factor to your premium rates . Type of coverage you have . This is a bit subjective however if you are still paying on your car , then you probably are paying for full coverage . This is more expensive than just liability . Please note , I am not recommending you to get liability just to reduce cost . Consult your auto insurance agent to review the plans you have available and the related costs . Be sure to ask why you need it , is it mandatory or required , what you loose if you do not have it .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
Insurance companies tend to assign policyholders into a risk group - high risk , low risk , average risk , etc. . Life insurance companies really have only two risk classes : standard and preferred . Within these classes you can have subclasses : standard smoker . Standard non-smoker . Preferred smoker . Preferred non-smoker . And you can have preferred best and standard best subclasses as well . Table ratings are typically assessed on top of the standard underwriting class . The rating means that you basically are considered a standard risk , but due to one or more other factors , your risk is higher than the average standard risk . Insurance companies vary in how they weigh each table , but typically , each table represents a 25 % increase in price over standard . So , if your standard premium is $ 1000 per year , a table A rating would make that premium $ 1250 . A table B rating would make that premium $ 1500 . And so on . I have seen carriers assist table ratings for all types of reasons . These include a high PSA ; history of heart attack ; build ; alcohol history ; driving record ; mountain climbing ; prior drug use ; cancer history ; scuba diving ; aviation ; foreign travel . Basically , you could take a look at every one of the questions on your insurance application , and depending on your answer , an insurance carrier may want to assess extra premium . On the overall , I think that system works in favor of the consumer . You are still able to get coverage . The system is much better than a black or white , take-you-or - leave - you set up . In addition , I think that by and large these extra premiums are assessed fairly . Obviously , the broker needs to hook you up with the carrier that will most aggressively apply its underwriting guidelines in your case . One carrier may only assess a table B , but another one might be a table G ! Still another one might decline you altogether . Your broker needs to be your guide in fending your way through the life insurance carrier jungle out there :-RRB- One other important note here : carriers sometimes have sales on policies through what are called table shaving discounts . This means that for certain types of cases , for a set period of time only , they will make an offer of standard to somebody who normally would be assessed a table rating . They usually cap it at table D or so . And they usually limit it to only permanent insurance such as universal life . Sales like this can give consumers really good bargains . Basically , you could buy a permanent product for a lower cost than a term product simply because the underwriting concessions wouldnt be available on the term product . I would also like to add that carriers typically go up to table L or so . When I have a client who represents a very high risk due to a serious medical condition or dangerous hobby , I like to see how high I can get a carrier to go with a table rating . I mean , if somebody really needs the coverage and has the money to pay for it , why not put hit with the premium to make it worth your while ? Its fun to see how hungry carriers can be for somebodys business :-RRB- .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Does High Cholesterol effect life insurance rates ? Yes , absolutely , High Cholesterol my even prevent you from purchasing life insurance at all . Depending on your score and ratios , high cholesterol will lower the class -LRB- rate -RRB- that you could receive . Exceptions are made for those who can show a good track record of medicated care that has reduced and controlled cholesterol levels . So treated cholesterol that shows control will not hurt the applicant as much as untreated or high numbers . This situation like high blood pressure , is treated more favorable by underwriters as it shows a history of care about the condition .
The lowest auto insurance rates are easily found when you work with an experienced broker and their website . Why ? It 's important to check multiple companies , and receive unbiased advice from someone with at least 20 years in the business . Whether you have a great driving record or are considered a high-risk , you 'll save money . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier Auto Insurance Broker for last 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
People who participate in high risk activities or have impaired health conditions often are charged much higher premiums for life insurance , whether they are applying for term or permanent coverage . The price that you pay is determined by your age , the requested amount of coverage , and risk classification . If the carrier offers a substandard/table-rating for the coverage , the premiums will usually be based off of the standard risk class with an extra 25 % increase for each extra letter assigned -LRB- the 25 % figure can vary by carrier - e.g. some may use 17 % , etc. -RRB- . For example , a Table B rating would cost the standard rate plus 50 % -LRB- B = 2 tables -RRB- , a Table D rating would cost double the standard rate -LRB- D = 4 tables -RRB- , etc. . Insurance companies may also look at assigning a flat extra rating with a specified cost per thousand dollars of insurance -LRB- such as $ 5.00 per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . Flat extras may be applied for only a few years , or for the life of the policy and are more commonly assigned for high-risk activities . Table-ratings are more commonly given for high-risk health conditions . I often also see many people just apply for a bunch of companies at the same time because they 're a high-risk individual . DO NOT do this ! . Applying for coverage with more than one company at the same time could hurt your chances of securing a policy . It is in your best interest to find out before applying what the most likely offer will be from 10-15 different companies so that you know what to expect and know that you are getting the best possible offer . I highly recommend working with an independent agent who can look at multiple companies for you - trying to get that information can be very difficult to do on your own . This is the exact field my group specializes in and would be happy to be of assistance with your program .
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Is Home Insurance Yearly ?
Annual #HomeInsurance rates are different for each home ; homeowners insurance premium is based on the coverage afforded , details of the risk and deductible chosen by the insured . There islink providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
No . You can continue to not have health insurance , however , if you elect this option , you will have to pay a penalty -LRB- a `` shared responsibility payment '' is how they titled it I believe -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid paying the penalty , you would need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An Index Annuity is a type of Fixed Deferred Annuity . It guarantees a minimum return , while allowing index-linked gains up to a specified yearly cap or `` limit '' . The index-linked gains are usually based on a yearly basis . The most common crediting method is the `` Annual Point to Point '' method ; this method credits the yearly gain -LRB- during the contract year -RRB- up to the specified cap . There are other Crediting Methods that calculate index movements on a monthly or even bi-annual basis . But it is important to remember that all index-linked gains are limited to the yearly or monthly cap ; this is the trade off for receiving a guaranteed minimum return .
Everyone will have to have health insurance that meets the standards set under the affordable care act or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Under the Affordable Care Act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No . Under the affordable care act , if you do not want to have health insurance , you can elect to pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Under the affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Under the Affordable Care Act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
No one has to buy health insurance , but it 's very advantageous to have it . The idea of health insurance is to protect yourself in case of a catastrophic financial event . In the case of health insurance , this can be when you have a visit to the hospital and/or you have to have surgery . While health insurance can be expensive , if you ended up in the hospital one time , you can be subject to thousands of dollars worth of medical bills . Under the affordable care act , if you do not want to purchase health insurance , you can elect topay a penalty instead -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , people do n't have to have health insurance . However , underthe Affordable Care Act , if you do not want to buy a health plan , you would be subject to a penalty payment -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . Many individuals have options for group insurance through their employer or they are on Medicare or Medicaid . If you decide to buy a health insurance plan , then you would either need to buy it on or off the health insurance exchanges . Buying on the exchanges is beneficial if you qualify for a subsidy . Subsidies can only be used for on-exchange plans - they can not be used towards plans sold off the health exchanges . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
No , you do n't have to have health insurance . However , underthe Affordable Care Act , if you do not want to buy a health plan , you will have to pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . Many individuals have options for group insurance through their employer or they are on Medicare or Medicaid . If you decide to buy a health insurance plan , then you would either need to buy it on or off the health insurance exchanges . Buying on the exchanges is beneficial if you qualify for a subsidy . Subsidies can only be used for on-exchange plans - they can not be used towards plans sold off the health exchanges . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare covers a preventive screening visit when you 're new to Medicare and yearly `` wellness '' visits . A full annual physical exam would not be covered at 100 % . The new to Medicare preventive visit can be completed one time within the first year your Part B is active and includes a review of your medical history , discussion about preventive services -LRB- e.g. certain screenings , shots , etc. -RRB- , ht/wt measurement , blood pressure check , vision test , and a BMI index check . The yearly `` wellness '' visits can be completed once every 12 months if you 've had Part B for longer than a year . The purpose of the wellness visits is to develop and monitor a plan to help prevent disease and disability based on your health . Your would complete a health risk assessment with your doctor as well . Like the welcome to Medicare preventive visit , these visits include a review of your medical history , ht/wt check , and a blood pressure check . These test are only covered at 100 % if you 're doctor accepts Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . Otherwise , you would be responsible for a portion of the costs -LRB- typically 20 % coinsurance -RRB- and the Part B deductible may apply -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . You can also be subject to paying for other services that are conducted during the visit if they are not covered as part of the preventive visit benefits -LRB- e.g. blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- . Typically , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only covers about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . You may want to look at supplementing your coverage with a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare supplement plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of more assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes . Health insurance today is , in short , guaranteed issue - you can not be denied health insurance for any pre-existing condition or other health-related reason . Depending on your income , you may be able to qualify for a subsidy to reduce the cost of your health insurance premium . If you are below the minimum requirements to qualify for a subsidy , you may be able to qualify for Medicaid . Under the Affordable Care Act , if you do not want to buy a health plan , you can be subject to pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . Many individuals have options for group insurance through their employer or they are on Medicare or Medicaid . If you decide to buy a health insurance plan , then you would either need to buy it on or off the health insurance exchanges . Buying on the exchanges is beneficial if you qualify for a subsidy . Subsidies can only be used for on-exchange plans - they can not be used towards plans sold off the health exchanges . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
I am actually working on these policies right now for a few clients . They are choosing an amount they want to spend per year , and committing that to a policy for their children . The basic objective is to accumulate an attractive amount of money that could then be distributed as supplemental retirement income later on in the kids lives . Since this money will grow over literally decades , enough can be grown so that the yearly income can be substantial . We are kind of backing into the face amount once we decide on the yearly contribution and on how much money we would like to let the children take out of the policy when the time is right . So , like anything else , you get what you pay for it . You can go high or low on the funding , and high or low on the face amount . It all depends on what role you want life insurance to play in wealth accumulation for your children . Why not go for it ?!
You 're not going to go to jail for not having health insurance . If you do n't have health coverage that meets the minimum essential coverage requirements , you would be subject to paying a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage .
Under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years .
You can pay a penalty if you prefer not to have a health insurance policy . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Can I Get My 401K Now ?
Can you get your 401k now ? In most cases the answer is yes , but the question is should you ? Cashing in your 401k plan prior to age 591/2 -LRB- unless you take a series of annuity like payments -RRB- subjects you to a 10 % penalty along with making any funds taxable as income . The other thing to think about with a question like this is if you cash out your retirement early , what will you have later ?
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 59 1/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 59 1/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
Which is better a Roth or a 401k ? Well , what are you trying to accomplish and have you given thought to doing both plans ? They basically work in opposite ways . The 401k allows you a tax break now to be paid later on the money distributed from the fund . The idea is you will be in a lower tax bracket so you 're coming out ahead . The Roth does the same thing in the opposite way . You pay your taxes on the contributions and take the money later for free . So with a Roth you 're paying taxes now , to avoid paying later .
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
Can you get your 401k now ? In most cases the answer is yes , but the question is should you ? Cashing in your 401k plan prior to age 591/2 -LRB- unless you take a series of annuity like payments -RRB- subjects you to a 10 % penalty along with making any funds taxable as income . The other thing to think about with a question like this is if you cash out your retirement early , what will you have later ?
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 59 1/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 59 1/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 70 1/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 59 1/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
You do n't want to close your 401k due to the fact you will be taxed on the income that it generated . The best way is to roll the 401k over so you can take the interest earned tax free there are several ways to do this you need to consult a financial planner and look at somethings this money you save now tax free will be needed much more in retirement due to taxes and inflation .
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
Well sometimes there can be certain people that will need a term policy because of where they have focused their budget in the past , over all it does n't fit every persons goals but will be cheaper . I will use my story to answer the question when I purchased my policy I realized that it would take some focus on my part even working with a very knowledgeable agent I already knew just like most families we wait until about 45 -55 years of age to purchase what we should have purchased in our 20 's in the first place and then we start shopping to find out wow this is not cheap but it is now or never . So $ 300 a month was not cheap for me but I knew it 's now or never so I made a commitment to my family it 's now I want leave them with this burden it 's just a decision just like the one that caused you to make the decision to wait . now where did that come from procrastination and that can be inherited by your children so I would say change your focus change your life .
end question
start question
annuities
Who Sells The Most Annuities ?
According to LIMRA , in 2012 the top issuing carrier of annuities , which is measured by the largest amount of incoming money into its annuity products , was Jackson National Life . Number 2 was Prudential and number 3 was Met Life .
Life insurance is not hard to sell . It 's actually very easy to sell . When you 're selling life insurance the main part of your job is prospecting for the right people . You are looking for the people who are aware that they need life insurance . Think of it this way . If you were selling swimming pools it would be very hard to sell them to 90 % of the people . But if you talked only to people who own homes , had yards and been thinking about buying a swimming pool it would be pretty easy to sell them . Selling life insurance is the same way . It 's very easy to sell to the right people and it 's impossible to sell to the wrong people .
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
You can buy annuities from Life insurance agents who sell them . If the annuity you are seeking to purchase is a variable annuity , you will need to do business with an agent who has securities licenses that allow him/her to sell them . Non-variable -LRB- fixed or indexed -RRB- annuities do not require a securities license to sell them , just a Life insurance license .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Most agents who sell Term Life Insurance also sell Whole Life . The exception may be some of the `` term shops '' on the internet . Final expense policies are usually Whole Life , so agents specializing in Senior life insurance would carry Whole Life . These usually have under $ 100,000 face amounts . `` Captive '' agencies -LRB- where they sell products for one company -RRB- usually have good Whole Life products for persons looking for larger face amounts . So do agencies that sell multiple products , but you need to consult with a licensed agent who understands Whole Life . A good way to start would be to call and ask for an agent who can compare a couple of Whole Life policies for you in detail . If they are unable to do that , move on to the next one .
The agents who sell Long Term Care Insurance are licensed in Health Insurance . However , many life insurance companies also sell Long Term Care Insurance , and many agents who specialize in Life Insurance also sell Long Term Care Insurance . You can input `` Long Term Care Insurance Quotes '' in a search engine to bring up a list of companies and how to reach them , or a broker who sells their products .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
There are two main types of annuities : Fixed and Variable . In order to sell Fixed annuities you need an insurance license for the state that you want to sell the annuity in . In order to sell a Variable annuity you need both an active state license as well as a securities license .
Yes , ING does sell annuities . They have a complete portfolio of annuities including : Fixed Annuities - a type of annuity that will pay you a fixed rate of return . Indexed Annuities - an annuity that credits interest based on the performance of an index . Immediate Annuities - this annuity is for someone with a lump sum of money who is interested in immediately turning that amount of money into a guaranteed income stream . Annuities are an important retirement planning vehicle with tax deferral , death benefit , and optional living benefits .
Commercial Annuities are contracts between an individual and a company that sells annuity products . The businesses that sell them are insurance companies or banks . Commercial annuities can pay a higher interest rate than other annuities . Because of this , the income that is received when drawing payments from the annuity have different tax implications than other annuities .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Insurance agents who are licensed in Life coverage can sell annuities . Indexed annuities are a contract with the annuity holder and the life insurance company in which the funds grow tax deferred . As long as the agent is not funding the Equity Indexed Annuity with qualified funds , no series 63 license is needed to sell this product .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
You can make good money selling life insurance , or you can make no money selling life insurance . Those who are really good at it tend to attract more and more clients , and do exceptionally well . On the other hand , those who struggle tend to move on fairly quickly , because it can be a brutal industry if you are not doing well . Most people are paid by commission only , and expenses can easily eat up profits . When there is a split in commissions , the pie often seems too small . Most insurance sales people fall somewhere in the middle and make a decent living at selling life insurance . With some good breaks , they have years where they make good money . And if you like what you are doing , that can be a worthwhile career .
To see fixed annuities , it takes an insurance license in Life and Annuities -LRB- the Life license covers both -RRB- . To sell variable annuities , it takes a series 6 -LRB- limited investment securities license -RRB- or series 7 license . The latter entitles the representative to work with all types of securities products , minus commodities and futures . If the agent selling fixed annuities needs to roll over funds from a qualified plan into the fixed annuity , a series 6 or 7 license is also required .
To find an agency that sells immediate annuities , you can go to a website or local life insurance agency that advertises them , or call to ask if they sell them . Immediate annuities are contracts between the person buying the annuity and the insurance company . Therefore , they are sold by agents who represent insurance companies .
It is the life insurance company through which the annuity was purchased that guarantees annuities . Annuities are a contract between the life insurance company selling the annuity and the person obtaining the annuity . Therefore , it is the life insurance company who honors the stated guarantees within the annuity contract .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Borrow From A Term Life Insurance Policy ?
Term life insurance has no cash value , so there nothing to borrow . But as personal property , an existing term life insurance that is convertible to permanent life insurance for older insured may have the potential to be sold in the life settlement market for cash .
Term life insurance does not have any cash value , so it is not possible to borrow from a Term life insurance policy . Term life insurance is `` pure protection '' that only covers financial loss from death , and does not provide the options for accumulating cash value like permanent life insurance does .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 714 422 9616 . garylane@cox.net .
No , you can not borrow money from a term life insurance policy because there is no cash value from which to borrow . The death benefit is only paid when death occurs , so you can not borrow from the death benefit . The one exception is if you are diagnosed as terminally ill and have an accelerated death benefit rider . That would enable you to take some of the death benefit in cash if you are diagnosed as terminally ill . There are a few term policies that offer living benefits like that for other reasons , such as being diagnosed as chronically or critically ill . Improved term products like that are being developed . Keep in touch to see how you could use your term for purposes other than death , even though technically , you can not borrow money from a term life insurance policy .
This is a pretty difficult question to answer in a forum like this . I highly recommend that you speak to a professionalone-on-one to completely evaluate your needs and to see if you can borrow - and if so , if it would be financially smart to borrow from a retirement fund . Feel free to contact me if you have no one else . To give you a little idea if you could however , here are some guidelines : Most retirement funds are NOT AVAILABLE to borrow from . If you have a Defined Benefit or a Cash Balance Benefit , you can not borrow from it . You can move your funds to a different account , with professional guidance to avoid penalties . But with these types of accounts , you usually can not touch until you retire . If you have a Profit Sharing account or a 401K - you MAY be able to borrow depending upon the rules of the company that it is through and/or the rules of the company you work for . Again , however , most will not allow you to borrow . If they do , typically you can only borrow 50 % of YOUR contributions -LRB- not what your company contributes -RRB- or $ 10k , whichever is less . Again , this is a very difficult and technical topic to get a solid answer here . Look me up if I can be of any further help .
If the whole life policy has a cash value you can borrow from the insurance company using your policy as collateral . the amount you can borrow can be as high as 90 % . Check with your life insurance broker to be sure . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it will trigger a taxable event . If / when you repay the loan you receive an adjustment you can use when you file your taxes . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , it does not trigger a taxable event . Check with you life insurance broker , to be advised of the consequents of borrowing . If you do borrow reminder to at least pay the interest on the loan to avoid compound and putting the policy ar risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
First of all , cash value life insurance is a bundled product and a bad investment . You should always separate your life insurance from any savings or investing that you are doing . Remember , life insurance is only there to protect your assets , pay off any remaining debt , and replace an income for your spouse . With this said , borrowing from a cash value policy means that you are borrowing from yourself and paying interest on the money that is saved in the policy . At the same time , your death benefit will decrease dollar for dollar by the money that you borrowed from your cash value . Now , you are paying the same premium for less insurance . Therefore , the benefits derived from borrowing from a life insurance policy will only be on the side of the insurance company .
When borrowing from a life insurance policy , you 're borrowing monies from its cash value - this is only available on permanent programs -LRB- cash value does n't build inside term insurance policies -RRB- . You can only borrow up to the amount available in the cash value - this figure typically goes up over time . Review your annual statement or call your agent/the carrier to find out the current cash value available inside the policy . Keep in mind , when you borrow from your policy 's cash value , you are in effect creating a loan because you are expected to pay back the borrowed amount - and with any loan , there is an interest rate attached . The longer it 's kept out , the more interest that is charged . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan against the policy , the loan amount plus any interest is subtracted from the death benefit and the difference is given to the beneficiary .
You can borrow from your life insurance policy by contacting your insurance company and requesting a loan . You may need to complete a form and you usually can borrow up to 90 % of the cash value . The specifics will be detailed in your policy wording . In Canada , when you borrow you will trigger a taxable gain if the amount borrowed exceeds the adjusted cost base . Be sure to check with the company concerning any tax consequences involved with borrowing . When/if you repay the loan you will receive a credit for this . Using the policy as collateral and borrowing from a bank does not trigger a taxable gain . A reminder , if you do not pay the interest on the loan , it will compound and could put the policy at risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
That is a great question ! The only things that you need to have in order to borrow from your Globe Life -LRB- or any company 's life insurance policy -RRB- are these : First , that you are the owner of the policy . If Your parents bought it for you when you were young , and they are still the owners , you will not be able to borrow from it . They can , but you ca n't . You must be the owner of the policy . Second , it must be a whole life policy , as term policies have no cash value ; And third , that there is an adequate cash reserve to borrow from . If the policy is fairly new , there may not be much to borrow from , or if there has already been a loan taken , you may not be able to take more cash out , without tanking the policy . My advice would be to contact your agent , or Globe themselves , -LRB- have your policy number handy -RRB- and ask them if you are good to borrow . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
The only type of life insurance that you can borrow from is Universal Life or Whole Life . You can not borrow from Term Life . There are many types of Universal Life and Whole Life , and especially with Universal Life , some policies will have very little cash value . If you are purchasing a Universal Life policy for the purpose of borrowing from it , you will do best with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life .
If it 's a permanent life insurance policy that builds cash value , you can borrow from it . The amount that can be borrowed depends on how much cash value has accrued inside the policy . When you borrow money from a life insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the money is expected to be paid back and loan 's require interest to be paid on the loan . If the insured dies and there is an outstanding loan balance on it , the beneficiary would receive the death benefit less the loan amount and any interest due on the loan . It may be helpful to discuss it with your agent before borrowing from the policy to find out more about what will happen -LRB- e.g. what 's the interest rate that will be attached to the loan -RRB- when you borrow from the cash value .
If you are the owner of the life insurance policy and the policy has a cash value you can borrow from a life insurance policy . You simply have to contact the insurance company and request a loan . There are some consideration you should be aware of including : If you borrow and do not pay the interest on the loan it compounds and could put the policy at risk of lapsing . In Canada borrowing from the policy could trigger a taxable policy gain . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , no taxable policy gain is triggered . You should discuss options with you insurance advisor , to ensure you are informed . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does My Auto Insurance Cover Me In Europe ?
I am assuming you are referring to renting a vehicle in Europe and your US coverage extending to the rental car . This totally depends on your carrier and their policy . Most likely NO , some -LRB- though not all -RRB- US carriers will extend coverage to Canada -LRB- many used to extend to Mexico as well , but more and more are removing this coverage -RRB- . There may be a few carriers out there that would extend to European Countries , but the only way to know for sure is to call them or you agent directly and ask . I 'd get it in writing too ... .
Most U.S. insurance companies do not do business in Europe . There are some that do . Check with your agent . You will probably find that your current coverage extends from the USA into Canada and along a strip of the Mexican border . There are many insurance companies that will be glad to help you find coverage in Europe . Enjoy the scenery and dont forget that the rules of the road are a bit different .
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , I ca n't give you a very positive answer . I do not know of a single US auto insurer that will extend coverage to you overseas . I know that if you were asking about Canada , or even Mexico , that I could give you a better answer , but not for Europe , I 'm afraid . Sorry , and thanks for asking !
US auto insurance does not cover you for driving a vehicle in Europe . It 's US insurance and will only cover you in the United States , Canada and US Territories . . US insurance has no jurisdiction in Europe and is unable to defend or bring suit in a court case . If you travel to Europe and rent a vehicle for example you will need to purchase temporary insurance if made available .
United States Auto insurance onlycoversthe United States , it 's territories and Canada . In order to operate a vehicle in Europe you would have to purchase coverage there as Europe does not recognize US insurance . Also the US insurance carriers have no recourse in the event of a law suit in a country outside their jurisdiction . Man US insurance carriers do cover you into Mexico but I recommend if entering Mexico you purchase Mexican Insurance as it is illegal in Mexico to drive without Mexican Insurance .
`` Non-Life Insurance '' , or `` General Insurance '' , in Europe is the equivalent of `` Property and Casualty Insurance '' in the United States and Canada . It is insurance that covers loss from a particular financial event . It does not cover a person 's life , as life insurance does . Therefore , it is called `` non-life '' insurance .
Group 16 is a classification of vehicles -LRB- mostly used in Europe -RRB- that are used to distinguish risk from other groups . For example , a Fiat 500 C and a Ford Fiesta are typically found in that group . If you live here in the US and will not be visiting Europe , it will not impact you .
Most U.S. insurance companies do not do business in Europe . There are some that do . Check with your agent . You will probably find that your current coverage extends from the USA into Canada and along a strip of the Mexican border . There are many insurance companies that will be glad to help you find coverage in Europe . Enjoy the scenery and dont forget that the rules of the road are a bit different .
Yours is an excellent question as many people do not realize that many group and individual health insurance policies do not cover them outside of the USA . There are specialized policies available to cover you when you are travelling outside the country . You should contact an insurance agent to explain your needs and to assist you in finding the policy best suited to your needs . Taking a cruise or travelling through Europe for a few weeks can be an entirely different situation than perhaps planning to be away for months or perhaps years on an overseas contracting assignment or religious or charitable mission trip . Also , your place of destination may be an important factor , working in Switzerland for a year is a totally different situation than volunteering to go to Syria or Afghanistan . If you need help with this need please feel free to contact me .
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , I ca n't give you a very positive answer . I do not know of a single US auto insurer that will extend coverage to you overseas . I know that if you were asking about Canada , or even Mexico , that I could give you a better answer , but not for Europe , I 'm afraid . Sorry , and thanks for asking !
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
Your insurance policy purchased in the United States will only cover rental car coverage in the United States , Canada , and it 's territories which would include Puerto Rico and Guam . Other countries do not recognize USinsurancein this particular situation and US based companies are not able to bring suit or defend out of US jurisdiction . You will need to purchase the insurance offered to you at the time of renting a car in Europe .
Axa home insurance , I believe , is available in Great Britain . It appears to be a reputable company but I am not familiar with companies in Europe . While it is true that I have a great British accent , which is popular at gatherings with folks from England , I am tot well-versed regarding their insurers .
That is a great question ! There were some types of travelers insurances offered in the 1840 's that covered you if your train crashed or steamboat sank , but other than that , there really was n't much until the late 1800 's when disability policies became popular . Britain passed a law in the early 1900 's that created a `` National Health Insurance '' , and most of Europe kind of adopted similar laws , but we did n't catch on until 1929 when us Texans -LRB- Baylor University Hospital , and some local teachers , I think -RRB- created a system of standardized costs for hospital stays . Shortly thereafter came Blue Cross/Blue Shield , and then all kinds of competing companies . The history of insurance is interesting stuff . Thanks for asking !
A terminal bonus -LRB- or capital bonus , or final bonus -RRB- can be paid upon maturity of a mutual policy . This is a feature of some `` with-profit '' Whole Life policies in Europe and Canada and other countries in the Commonwealth of Nations . It is comparable to a final dividend in the US .
Critical illness insurance is a relatively new product in the US . Originating in South Africa and Europe , critical illness customarily pays a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis for as many as 20 or so `` dread diseases '' . More broad in scope than just a cancer plan , critical illness is something everyone should consider .
Direct Line is handed in Europe and morespecifically , Great Britain . Here in the United States , there are many major car insurance companies that offer affordable coverage . You can easily shop and compare different rates through experienced brokers . Just like the famous saying says ... We shop and you save ! And it 's true !
Car insurance groups -LRB- this terminology is used mostly in parts of Europe -RRB- vehicles according to their risk . Although we do the same thing here in the US , we tend to use different descriptions for the classifications . A broker that is experienced in these types of groupings can tell you where your vehicle should be placed .
I am assuming you are referring to renting a vehicle in Europe and your US coverage extending to the rental car . This totally depends on your carrier and their policy . Most likely NO , some -LRB- though not all -RRB- US carriers will extend coverage to Canada -LRB- many used to extend to Mexico as well , but more and more are removing this coverage -RRB- . There may be a few carriers out there that would extend to European Countries , but the only way to know for sure is to call them or you agent directly and ask . I 'd get it in writing too ... .
Global Index Universal Life Insurance is IUL that offers interest crediting based on an equity index strategy option that includes foreign stock market indexes in addition to US stock marked indexes . Non US indexes commonly used are the EuroSTOXX 50 Index -LRB- Western Europe -RRB- and the Hang Seng Index -LRB- Hong Kong -RRB- . Depending on the Global Index Universal Life product , it usually offers the choices of a fixed interest strategy , an indexed strategy , or a combination of the two . The features of IUL that attracts consumers is the potential to accumulate higher than normal cash values through their ability to take advantage of the upside potential of the market . Yet there is a 0 % floor that helps protect them against downside risks .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Water Heater Damage Covered By Homeowners Insurance ?
Some water damage is covered , while others are not . If the water damage is the result of a burst water pipe in your house then the policy will probably cover repairs . If the source of the water is outside your home , as in a flood , coverage is excluded unless you have a flood policy . If the source of water is a back-up in the sewer it can be covered in your homeowners policy if you purchase the appropriate additional coverage .
If your water heater just wears out then no homeowners insurance will not cover the water heater . If your water heater was to burst for example and water damaged your home then your insurance will cover the damage to the home but still will not cover the water heater . If something outside damages the water heater such as a fire , or falling object then the water heater would be covered .
It would depend on what happened to the water heater and what type of policy you have . If thewater heater is damaged in a fire , or a tornado , you should havecoverage . A `` special form '' insurance policy will normally cover damage from a burst water heater , so they will pay for the clean up of the water but not to replace the water heater it 's self , since it was the cause of the claim . Remember , an insurance policy is for damage , but not maintenance . So if it quits , or does n't function like it is supposed to , that is an expense you would have to absorb . If the water heater is damaged by a `` Covered peril '' -LRB- refer to your contract -RRB- - then yes , it is part of the house and covered like anything else .
Your water heater is part of your home , just like th rest of your plumbing system , so yes , it would be covered . What it is covered for depends on what type of coverage you have purchased . For example home insurance does n't pay for mechanical failure , so if it just quits working you do n't have a claim . If your water heater bursts , you may have coverage for water damage coming out of the water heater if you havea `` Special Form '' policy . If the house burns up and your water heater goes along with it , your insurance should pay for a home with a water heater . So you see it depends a lot . Email me with specifics at WEBSITELINK
Typically a water heater will be covered if there is damage from a source OTHER than wear and tear or flood . The damage resulting from a water heater leak is generally covered . The one exception will be mold that forms away from the original water damage sight , if the mold becomes airborne . I would check with your local independent agent to make sure the company he/she selects for you has water damage coverage limits sufficient enough to cover a claim should it arise . Here in NC there are sub-limits to water damage claims .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Homeowners insurance does not cover the replacement of an old hot water heater but it MAY cover damage caused by a leaking hot water heater as long as the home owner is not found to have neglected the normal maintence of his home which does include replacing your water heater before it rusts through .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . The resulting damage from a water heater that suddenly ruptures is a covered loss . The water heater itself is not covered but the resulting water damage to your personal belongings would be covered . Check your deductible before filing a claim to make sure it makes sense to file the claim .
The homeowners policy will provide coverage for damage caused by a ruptured hot water heater . It will not replace the hot water heater , itself . It is very important to get assistance urgently as water damage never improves , it only gets worse . It is particularly critical if carpets or wood floors are involved .
It really depends upon the cause of the presumed damage to your water heater . If the unit simply fails , or bursts die to wear and tear , then the resulting water damage to your property may be covered but not the unit itself . If the unit is damaged as a result of a lightening strike , however , it may be possible that the damage to the unit may be covered under your Homeowners ' policy . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your contract .
This depends on the cause . If water is seeping though the walls , it typically is not covered as that would be considered maintenance . If the water is due to flood , it would only be covered under a flood policy . If the damage was due to a busted pipe or water heater , it would normally be covered . Repairs for common damp basements are not covered by homeowners insurance .
Boilers are a specialized form of insurance and include inspection services . The homeowners policy will cover a loss that results from a sudden release of water or steam . The vessel is the issue here and a homeowners policy does not cover the boiler . The same is true of a residential hot water heater . The policy will pay for loss as the result of a failure ; however , it will not replace the appliance .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
This is a difficult question to answer without viewing your specific policy and the coverages contained in it . Is a water heater covered within a policy , generally yes . It just depends on what happens . For example , general wear and tare is not covered under the standard homeowners policy ; however , if you adding coverage for appliances or household items -LRB- that would have cost you more each year -RRB- or you pay for a home warranty , it could be covered for wear and tare . If the damage is from a busted pipe that occurred by no fault of your own or was from a power surge , it could be protected if the policy is setup correctly . It does come down to what exactly you have your policy and within the policy what the limits are . If you have a home warranty program that is always the best way to go because claims with the warranty companies will not result in higher premiums for your homeowners policy , but if you take a claim against your homeowners for the coverage -LRB- EVEN if it is n't covered -RRB- it could result in a slight increase in your prices for next year . If the cost is less than your deductible it would n't benefit you to make a claim on the home policy either .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
It depends upon the source of the water damage , the type of policy you have and whether the house is abandoned . To make this answer easier , lets assume that you have a Homeowners 3 policy and the house is either occupied or vacant -LRB- some furniture and presence -RRB- . Water damage from a burst pipe : typically your homeowners insurance will water damage from a burst pipe , however it will not cover the damaged pipe . You can get an endorsement to cover the damaged pipes . Water damage from rain/hail/wind : this will only be covered on a basic homeowners policy if the rain/hail caused the hole in the roof that lead to the water damage in your bathroom . Once again , you can get an endorsement to cover rain/hail/wind damage . Water damage from sewer backup or sump-pump failure : if the bathroom is in the basement and the water damage if from sewer backup or sump-pump failure you can only get coverage for this IF you have the appropriate endorsement - sewer and water backup . Please note that this is typically a sub-limit in your policy and goes towards both cleanup and replacement . I hope this helps .
Great question . Your water heather is not something your home insurance will cover in a claim situation . You will have to pay to replace it yourself . Unless you have a home warranty policy that can cover your water heater . Good luck and you should always contact your local insuance broker for additional questions .
Check with your insurance agent to find out if you have a `` named peril '' or `` all risk '' policy . This will help you determine when your water heater is covered under a homeowners policy . Normal wear and tear or maintenance is not covered . However , some companies are now offering a separate home warranty policy that can cover plumbing , electrical , heating and applicances .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Plan F For Medicare Supplement ?
Medicare supplement plan F is the most popular Medigap plan in most states . It is the easiest one to explain , the one with the richest benefits , highest premium and highest agent commission . Is it any wonder Medicare supplement plan F is sold more than any other plan ? There are almost always better values and lower premiums with other plans . Over 90 % of my clients pick something other than Medicare supplement plan F.
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plan F is the most popular and most comprehensive of the 10 supplement plans , but also features the highest premiums . If budget is not a major concern , I would recommend going with this plan as it offers the most predictable healthcare expense structure - just about everything in hospital and doctor office visits , tests , and exams are covered at 100 % . Plan N can be a great option as well , especially if your doctors accept assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- thus not subjecting you to any excess charges -LRB- which plans F and G cover -RRB- . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans in total and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . In short , each plan has it 's own pros and cons and what may be suitable for you may not be for someone else . Independent agent can provide you with the rates for multiple companies and help get you set up with the plan that 's right for you . Carriers try to differentiate themselves by competing on rates and what , if any , value-added services they offer . Value-added services can be things like a help line , discounts for services -LRB- such as dental and vision - not dental and vision insurance , just discounts off the full price -RRB- , and others . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Plan F is your `` cadillac '' plan -LRB- so-to-speak -RRB- because it provides the most comprehensive coverage and is the most popular Medicare supplement plan . Like other Medicare supplement plans , it covers basic benefits for medical and hospital expenses this plan will pay the remaining portion of whatever Medicare does not pay for medical and hospital charges as long as the charge is approved by Medicare . Ideally , this plan will benefit people who want to have the peace of mind in knowing that all of their Medicare approved charges will be covered - in short , you 're writing the check for your monthly premium and you 're done . You can add a Part D plan to provide coverage for prescriptions . Medicare Supplement Plan F covered benefits include : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Should I Get A Life Insurance ?
My advise is to get a Whole Life insurance policy as soon as possible ! As Jim commented above premiums are lower the younger you are . That 's true for all types of life insurance , but the real advantage to buying a policy early is when you buy a Whole Life policy from a Mutual company that pays dividends on top of the minimum interest on your cash value . The longer you let the cash value grow the more you 'll have at your disposal when you want or need it to supplement your retirement income !
You should get a life insurance policy when you have a need for the coverage . Many times a need arises when certain life events happen such as getting married , having a child , running a business with partners . For personal insurance , many people get life insurance to protect their family from financial struggles in the event of their death - in these cases , the need may be your family maintaining their current lifestyle -LRB- income replacement -RRB- , paying off your child 's college tuition , mortgage , cars , burial expenses , or other outstanding expenses . For business insurance , if you have business partners , you all may want to set up a buy-sell agreement to instruct what will happen to the ownership of the business in the event one of the partners dies or set up a key-man policy . Many individuals also buy life insurance for estate planning purposes -LRB- e.g. paying off taxes for asset transference -RRB- - you can look in to creating trusts to handle how you want the life insurance proceeds to be distributed -LRB- e.g. a revocable or irrevocable life insurance trust -RRB- . In these cases , you want to work with an independent life insurance agent/broker who has a strong background in estate planning - they will likely have referrals to estate planning attorneys as well .
You can get life insurance whenever you want . Chances are , if you are thinking about it , you already have a need for it . Life insurance is one of those things that it almost never helps to put it off , unless you have to due to a recent medical diagnosis . Because prices go up as you age , it will probably never be cheaper than it is today .
That is a great question ! Life insurance is one of those things where the younger you are when you get it , the cheaper it will be . I pay $ 5 a month for the policy that my Dad bought for me when I was a child . If I were to purchase the same policy today , I guarantee you I 'd pay a whole lot more . My practice is to advise protecting yourself and your children by purchasing a policy at as young an age as possible . Children unfortunately pass , or develop illnesses that can be devastating financial hardships , or prevent them from getting affordable insurance later in life . I hope that helps , if you 'd like more detail , please drop me a line . Thanks for asking !
You should purchase life insurance when you feel it is appropriate . I purchased my first whole life policy when I was 18 years old . I wanted to pay for my final expenses , establish my insurability and I looked to the policy to help me save money in a disciplined manner . When I married , I increased my policy to provide for my brides needs should I die prematurely . I still buy life insurance and am contemplating an additional purchase .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
A life insurance brokerage is a business through which multiple life insurance carriers are represented . The brokers that are affiliated with the brokerage are appointed with different companies . A successful brokerage one that really gets the job done for the consumer should have certain characteristics . First of all , it should specialize in one product line : life insurance . The broker should be a master of his craft . He or she should be an expert in life insurance underwriting , because it is through getting good underwriting that you deliver the best value to your client . Good underwriting can give you the lowest rate/highest cash value accumulation . If the broker sells multiple products , such as life insurance , and annuities , and disability insurance , and investments , etc. , then he really is a jack of all trades and master of none . Another point is that the brokerage should be run just as any good business is run . You make commitments and you deliver on them . This means that the sales model of the brokerage should be to provide a quote about which they are confident the client will be approved . It is common business sense to quote a reliable price . Prequalification should therefore be an essential part of the service the brokerage provides . Clients are entitled to know the company , product , and price before submitting a formal application . Then all involved can be sure that going through underwriting will be worthwhile . A brokerage operation should be designed to make the purchase of life insurance a very satisfying experience for the consumer .
When you buy from a company you 'll get acceptable advice , I have little doubt . What you wo n't likely get is advice from someone who knows where you live on a personal basis . You 'll also probably never get to speak to the same person twice because service by the company is n't assigned to one person but a phone boiler room full of inbound call clerks . You 're not likely to get advice that is based upon actual experience but is learned from the sterile depictions in a text book . In a nutshell , it is hard to make a call center accountable when something goes wrong with your coverage . On the other hand , I learn to help you avoid problems when I also get to experience the problems our customers encounter . In effect you get the collective experience of 1000 's of my customers . Plus , no phone clerk has the incentive I have to help you get insurance right ! We 're certainly not perfect but an agent might be the best thing that comes with a policy . By the way , the Ohio Dept of Insurance has just come out publicly with a recommendation to buy insurance from an agent . I happen to agree .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
There are many reasons that people can be denied life insurance , but unfortunately , people sometimes get denied for reasons that could have been avoided . Avoidable declines are often due to agents who do not do a thorough job in asking questions of their clients before applying . But denials can also be a result of clients who lie or hide information , hoping to pay a better price . Most often , clients simply do not think that something matters -LRB- e.g. bankruptcy -RRB- , or are not aware of what is in their medical records -LRB- e.g. CHF instead of high blood pressure -RRB- . Ironically , one would think that the simplified issue policies that you apply for by mail would be the simplest to get , because they have the least questions and no exam to trip you up . But I find that these are a source of many declines , due to their ambiguous wording , or people not taking the time to read the instructions well . I have been writing mostly impaired risk life insurance online for over 10 years , so have written thousands of policies for people with health conditions . But just when I get to feeling good about so many cases getting approved as I quoted , I will get hit with a decline out of left field that I did not see coming . Sometimes , it just seems impossible to avoid them . But a good agent should not have a lot of them , or they are not probably doing their job as they should .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This really is n't an insurance question as a political one . I can only offer my opinion and it may not be agreeable to some depending on where you live . Do I think gun owners should carry liability insurance by mandate ? Yes , I do . And I will tell you why . Accidents happen . Guns get discharged accidently , hunters and hikers are accidently shot every year . What happens when the person who has been shot , but not killed ? Who pays their bills ? Who covers the cost of their care ? Should the person responsible be able to say , sorry I have no insurance , too bad for you . Someone already cited `` part '' of the 2nd amendment in a post . Let me add the other part , '' A well regulated Militia '' . I am a well regulated insurance agent , which means I am licensed for insurance sales and required to carry `` E&O -LRB- errors and omissions -RRB- insurance '' to protect the consumer . If by accident I were to cause harm , there would be coverage to help them . It 's an expense to me as I pay for this coverage . I do n't mind that much because if for some reason , by accident I created a harmful situation I would want to provide more than an I 'm sorry .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
At what age do you get life insurance has a simple answer . You can get life insurance at any age . Your parents can get it for you the day you are born if they so choose . Perhaps the better question might be when should you consider getting life insurance ? If you have a family , spouse or just children you should consider getting life insurance . If you own a small business , have key employee 's and/or a business partner , you might consider life insurance . If your concerned about your estate or would like to build tax free income for retirement , you might consider life insurance . You see , it really is not about your age so much but what is the purpose of the insurance . That said , the younger you are , the cost if insurance is less .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
Hahah ! I like Brandi Jo 's answer above best ! But the answer to your question , `` Should I convert to Whole Life and When ? '' depends on a number of things . Will you be retiring at 60 or are you retired now ? How much liquidity do you have now ? Will you have a need for insurance when you turn 60 ? So the answer to your question depends on your goals and needs for insurance . You should talk with an insurance adviser . Personally I think you should 've started with Whole Life , but that not being the case if you are going to convert your term policy you should do it immediately .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Medications Are Covered By Medicare ?
Prescription medications are not covered by Medicare parts A or B . You have to purchase a part D plan separately . Part D plans are sold by private companies , and each one has a different list of covered medications -LRB- formulary -RRB- . The Medicare.gov website has a tool to help you identify the plan that provides the best coverage for your unique set of prescribed medications .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medicare Part B typically covers 80 % of your medical necessary services performed by medical providers that are assigned to Medicare . Doctors assigned to Medicare agree to only charge what Medicare allows for a particular procedure . If you medical procedures are done by providers that are n't assigned to Medicare , then you could be responsible for up to an additional 15 % above what Medicare covers for a particular procedure . If you have Supplemental -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , the Plans F & G are the only two plans that cover that 15 % .
Most of the medical care related to Alzheimer 's disease is covered by Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital insurance -RRB- . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , your policy may help cover the co-insurance and deductibles associated with Original Medicare Part A and B . You can contact your insurance company or an insurance agent who specializes in Medicare Supplements to review your Medigap benefits . As for medications , a Part D prescription plan will cover most Alzheimers medications . Your costs -LRB- co-pays and deductibles -RRB- will depend on your plan . Unfortunately , long-term custodial care costs -LRB- nursing home , assisted living , or adult day care -RRB- are not covered by Medicare . Even hiring home help for bathing , toileting and dressing -LRB- custodial care -RRB- is not covered by Medicare unless the Medicare Beneficiary is receiving skilled-nursing care , physical or occupational therapy to assist with the recovery from an illness or injury . If I can be of further assistance , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Plan F is your `` cadillac '' plan -LRB- so-to-speak -RRB- because it provides the most comprehensive coverage and is the most popular Medicare supplement plan . Like other Medicare supplement plans , it covers basic benefits for medical and hospital expenses this plan will pay the remaining portion of whatever Medicare does not pay for medical and hospital charges as long as the charge is approved by Medicare . Ideally , this plan will benefit people who want to have the peace of mind in knowing that all of their Medicare approved charges will be covered - in short , you 're writing the check for your monthly premium and you 're done . You can add a Part D plan to provide coverage for prescriptions . Medicare Supplement Plan F covered benefits include : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For the most part , Medicare only covers prescriptions when one is hospitalized , under Part A . Some types of medications , such a certain cancer treatments , can also be covered under Medicare Part B , though most drugs one takes outside of a hospital are only covered if you have added Medicare Part D prescription coverage through a private insurance company . In such a case , this medication could be covered , as long as it appears on your company 's formulary list of covered medications , as the drug is considered to be medically necessary .
As a general rule , Labiaplasty is considered a cosmetic procedure and therefore it is excluded from coverage for notmeeting medical necessity requirements . Are there situations where a Labiaplasty would meet the criteria for medical necessity and then be covered as any other covered condition ? Yes . Some women experience issues that are best medically addressed using this procedure . However , you should approach this kind of potential claim with the understanding that your insurance carrier 's first instinct will be to see this as a cosmetic issue not a medical one , even if a cursory medical diagnosis is made . Be prepared to truly demonstrate medical necessity and understand what your carrier 's criteria for medical necessity are when you approach them on a procedure of this type . It is a procedure that has grown in popularity as a cosmetic procedure and so attempts to camouflage the cosmetic procedure under a thin cover of medical necessity are hardly unheard of .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
I am going to make a different assumption from Julie on this and go with a travel MEDICAL insurance plan vs. auto . Travel medical insurance is designed to supplement your major medical or Medicare plan when you travel outside the United States . Most major medical plans have worldwide coverage but there are some expenses that are not covered by major medical . These would include med evac , translation of medical records and return of mortal remains . Some Medicare Advantage plans have out of country coverage but if you have original Medicare your out of country coverage is limited . It would be wise to purchase an international travel medical plan .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance.It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Have To Go Through Probate ?
Life insurance that is left to a person as beneficiary does not have to go through probate . A check is sent to the beneficiary shortly after the death claim and certified death certificate are sent to the life insurance insurance company . On the other hand , if the estate is set up as the beneficiary , or if the beneficiaries stated on the policy are not alive at the time of the death of the insured person , the proceeds would go to the estate and then , through probate .
Typically , when the beneficiaries of your life insurance policy are listed in the proper manner , the proceeds from life insurance pass to the listed beneficiaries directly . This means the process of the paying of any life insurance benefits happens outside the probate process . I hope this helps . If you have anything more specific you 'd like to ask . Please do .
In Canada , typically if the beneficiaries of the policy are individuals then the proceeds of the policy do not need to go through probate . If the beneficiary is the estate then the proceeds will have to be probated and subject to claims of creditors . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
One of the big advantages of life insurance is that it does not have to go through probate . My father died about a year ago , and he had several small life insurance policies . My mom was truly surprised that she had quick access to those funds to pay for Dad 's funeral , without having to wait for probate -LRB- which still has not been completed , as far as I know -RRB- . And surprised again when she just found out for sure that she did not have to pay any taxes on them . No matter how much you trust your agent , it is collecting on life insurance that can make believers of anyone .
If there is no beneficiary cited on a life insurance policy -LRB- or the beneficiary is the estate -RRB- , the proceeds are paid to the estate . From there , they will go through the probate process if there is no instruction for how the proceeds are to be distributed - when this happens , the courts would decide how the estate is to be distributed . If a beneficiary is designated , then the proceeds would be paid to that person -LRB- s -RRB- / entity rather than going through the probate process .
Life inusrance policies have designated beneficaries , so itdoes n't go through probate . Unassigtned assets generally go through probate . Qualified retirment plans also have assigned beneciaires , so those assets also by pass probate . It 's important to consult with an estate or probate attorney before retitling ownership or the reassignment of any beneficaries .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does life insurance go through probate ? Generally , when a policy insured dies , he or she has beneficiaries . Those beneficiaries generally see the proceeds direct to them , bypassing probate . I love this because those proceeds then generally , by the way absolutely tax free , go to their beneficiaries without having the interference or going through the steps of probate . What that means is that that money , when it comes direct , the beneficiaries can use that money as they see fit . So there 's no dictate from probate how it 's done , how it 's used , or that it has to go through state probate first . It generally goes to the beneficiaries , and then they can use that to pay off indebtedness or to put money aside for future obligations . And that 's why I like it , because its one of the perks of life insurance . It generally goes directly to beneficiaries and not through probate .
Life insurance does not usually go through probate . If it is left to a person , charity , or group , it bypasses probate . However , if the beneficiary is the estate , or if all the beneficiaries are deceased , the proceeds of the policy will go to the estate , and thus , go through probate .
Life inusrance policies have designated beneficaries , so itdoes n't go through probate . Unassigtned assets generally go through probate . Qualified retirment plans also have assigned beneciaires , so those assets also by pass probate . It 's important to consult with an estate or probate attorney before retitling ownership or the reassignment of any beneficaries .
Life insurance does not go to probate unless the beneficiary on the policy is the estate . If there are no living beneficiaries at the time of the death of the Insured person , the life insurance can also go to probate . If the policy 's beneficiary is a person or trust , the life insurance proceeds do not need to go through probate in most circumstances .
Always consult a probate attorney before assuming what assets bypass or go through probate . For the most part non-qualified annuities should by pass probate . The state of residence may have differing rules of engagement on their proprietary probate procedures . Keep in mind that the annuity may be owner driven or annuitant driven , which can dictate the how the annuity is processed through probate .
No , an annuity does not usually go through probate . As a life insurance product , annuities designate a beneficiary on the policy , and if the annuitant dies , the money from the annuity goes to that person . Like life insurance , the money does not go through probate when left to a person as beneficiary . Contact a tax consultant for more information and different scenarios .
Life insurance proceeds can go the estate of the insured on purpose or by accident but there is no reason they should . Naming a beneficiary and reviewing periodically is usually the right thing to do . If the estate is the beneficiary , the access of the heirs to any money associated with the life insurance policy is delayed because the money must go through probate . Probate may , in some cases , cause a delay of a year or more . Life insurance proceeds left to the estate , like any asset left to the estate , are forced through the probate process and therefore become part of the public record , so privacy is lost . Perhaps most importantly , in most states , the money paid into probate becomes subject to the claims of creditors of the estate .
Does life insurance need to be probated ? No life insurance does not have to go through probate if a stated beneficiary is named within the policy . Life insurance bypasses probate in most situations . A person can name their estate as beneficiary if they so choose putting the money inside the estate to be broken up and divided according to the will . OR they can simply have named beneficiaries to which the insurance company distributes funds .
is life insurance part of a will ? In most cases NO , as life insurance is a separate thing that works outside of probate and a will . Life insurance pays to a stated beneficiary directly , it does n't need to go through probate or be included in a will . That said , you can make the will your beneficiary and put it through probate if you so choose .
Life insurance proceeds generally do not have to go through probate unless they are left to the estate . If the beneficiary is listed on the policy as `` estate '' , or if the persons who were listed as beneficiaries are no longer alive , then the life insurance proceeds will go through probate . If the proceeds are left to a living person , they will be paid to that person directly , bypassing probate .
The death benefit is usually income tax free to the beneficiary . The reason why I say usually is because there are a few circumstances where the benefit would be taxable . If the death benefit is paid out in installment payments and is gaining interest , the beneficiary would have to pay taxes on the interest earned . The beneficiary of a life insurance policy receives a lump sum of money from the insurance company that is not included as income . The applicant does not pay any taxes on their premium payments as well . Life insurance also skips probate court . Probate court is the court that deals with distribution of assets after one passes . Most individuals have their assets tied up in probate from six months to over two years . Walt Disney passed away in 1966 his estate is still in probate . Nobody has access to the individuals estate until it has gone through the probate court . Life insurance bypasses the probate process and goes to the beneficiary income tax free in most cases .
Not usually . As long as the policy has a named beneficiary who is alive when the insured dies the proceeds will normally skip the probate process . If there are no living beneficiaries when the insured dies , then the proceeds are paid to the insured 's estate at which time the funds would need to go through the probate process in order to be distributed to heirs . Keep in mind that proceeds paid to a deceased beneficiary could end up in that beneficiary 's estate and would need to go through the probate process in order for that beneficiary 's heirs to receive the proceeds .
Life insurance that is left to a person as beneficiary does not have to go through probate . A check is sent to the beneficiary shortly after the death claim and certified death certificate are sent to the life insurance insurance company . On the other hand , if the estate is set up as the beneficiary , or if the beneficiaries stated on the policy are not alive at the time of the death of the insured person , the proceeds would go to the estate and then , through probate .
Creditors can not reach life insurance proceeds to pay off the debts of the deceased insured person unless the beneficiary of the policy was not a person . I.e. . If the insured named his/her `` estate '' as the beneficiary , then the policy proceeds go through probate , giving creditors for the deceased , access to those funds . If the beneficiary is a person , the life insurance proceeds do not usually go through probate , but directly to that person . Creditors can not reach the money that went to the beneficiary unless the beneficiary shared the debt with the deceased .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does A Life Insurance Examiner Do ?
Life insurance examiners -LRB- also called `` paramed '' examiners -RRB- conduct life insurance exams for paramedical companies , either as employees or independent contractors . Since many life insurance exams are done in the Insured person 's home , examiners must have transportation and a means of contacting the applicant to be sure the the appointment is set up and kept . Paramed examiners gather the health history from the applicant , perform phlebotomies , collect urine specimens , take vitals , administer EKG 's , and compile it all into a legible report to submit to the life insurance company in a timely manner . They must be courteous , confidential , reliable , and professional in manner .
Life insurance examiners -LRB- also called `` paramed '' examiners -RRB- conduct life insurance exams for paramedical companies , either as employees or independent contractors . Since many life insurance exams are done in the Insured person 's home , examiners must have transportation and a means of contacting the applicant to be sure the the appointment is set up and kept . Paramed examiners gather the health history from the applicant , perform phlebotomies , collect urine specimens , take vitals , administer EKG 's , and compile it all into a legible report to submit to the life insurance company in a timely manner . They must be courteous , confidential , reliable , and professional in manner .
Here is the list that I keep on file for my clients : >> Fast for a minimum of 8 Hours Prior to Exam unless you are diabetic or have another health condition . If you do have a health condition we will discuss specific instructions for your case . >> Insist on Morning appointments only ! Blood pressure and exam results tend to be better in the morning . Many examiners are available on Saturdays as well . >> If you are sick on the day of your exam , cancel . We can always reschedule the exam when you are better . >> Take your medications as you normally would . >> Avoid alcohol for a minimum of 24 hours prior to your exam . Blood pressure , liver enzymes and more may be elevated otherwise . >> If you smoke , do not smoke prior to your exam . Smoking raises blood pressure . For cigar smokers and other tobacco users Some of the companies will give you a non-smoker rate but your urine sample needs to be negative for nicotine . Please call to discuss your case >> Your weight Check your weight in the days leading up to your exam . On the day of your exam , take your shoes off , dont wear belts , empty your pockets , wear light clothing . IMORTANT Make sure you ask the examiner what your weight is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to weigh you again . >> Your height Stand up straight just like Mom told you to . IMPORTANT Ask the examiner what your height is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to check again . >> Avoid Caffeine on Exam day Caffeine elevates your blood pressure . Avoid it for at least a few hours prior to exam . >> Cholesterol TIP Eat plenty of oatmeal and bananas in the week leading up to your exam and lay off the sweets and other cholesterol elevating foods . >> Exercise TIP If you exercise , do NOT exercise on the morning of your exam . Exercise may artificially raise your blood pressure . >> Water Drink lots of water to flush out your system leading up to the exam .
In order to prepare for a life insurance health exam , there are a number of things to do and not do . You want your health exam to to be as good as it can be to in order to receive the best rates possible and avoid additional tests , Start with a good night 's sleep before the exam and do not do any heavy exercise for 24 hours before , You may be required to fast for 12 hours if a blood test is being done . Regardless avoid food and drink -LRB- except water -RRB- for 2 hours prior . Drinking water before the exam is a good idea to provide a urine specimen . Avoid caffeine for several hours and alcoholic beverages for at least 8 hours before the exam . If you smoke , avoid smoking for at least 1 hour before the exam . Continue taking any prescription medicines and bring them to the exam for reference . If you are taking over-the-counter medicines , try and avoid them for 24 hours prior to your exam . Inform the examiner if you do take one and why you did . Abnormal tests can result if you are ill or under stress at the time of the exam . If you are unable to reschedule , be sure and inform the examiner . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
I presume from your question that you must be a health care provider or supply some type of service and/or product that is reimbursable under health insurance plans . First , you need to determine the competitive environment for your product or service in your marketplace . If you have lots of competition your negotiating position will not be as strong -LRB- perhaps nonexistent -RRB- as if there is limited competition for your product or service in your marketplace . The insurance company will know the answer to this question from their perspective so you need to know the answer too before engaging in discussions with insurance carriers . Know what the absolute minimum is that you can accept as payment for your product or service . In today 's environment cost is the main driver in provider contracting , any insurance carrier is going to want the lowest possible cost from any provider/vendor they contract with . What they want to pay could well be below your cost of providing the service . You will have to make a business decision if such an arrangement would make business sense in the overall context of your total business model . What is your unique selling proposition ? What do you offer that a competitor or other product does not provide or provide as well ? Do you offer a qualitative advantage , a price advantage , or both ? They are going to ask you these questions and expect you to prove it so be prepared . Do research on the insurance carriers . Does your target market align with theirs ? If your focus is on infant care calling on an insurance carrier who is more focused on the senior marketplace is obviously a waste of everyone 's time . Even among health insurance carriers that from the outside seem to be competing for the same market segment you will find upon closer examination that they all have their areas of market strengths and weaknesses and marketplace segments they focus on . Some are more oriented towards individual and small group health insurance while others really shine in the large group space . Knowing this in advance and knowing what your capabilities are will allow you to focus on the prospective carriers best aligned with the marketplace that is also the best fit for your product or service . Once you have these basics understood you can begin contacting the various insurance carriers and ask to be put in touch with the department and/or person who handles the insurance carrier 's provider contracting and you can let the games begin .
Yes , but it depends on which state you live in as some states restrict these types of plans . Something to keep in mind when dealing with the purchase of insurance is the fewer questions an insurance company asks , the more expensive the policy will be . Skipping a examination means fewer questions , which comes back to price , which would be higher . I should also address what 95 % of an insurance `` physical '' involves . A medical examiner -LRB- usually a nurse -RRB- meets with you at your home or another place that works for you , They will take your blood pressure , check your pluse , have you step on a scale , ask about your medical history , draw some blood and collect a urine sample . Usually takes about 35 minutes or so . In cases involving large face amounts and an older client , a full medical exam may be done . It is also worthwhile to note that the cost of these exams are picked up by the insurance carrier .
The requirements to have a life insurance license vary by state . In California there is a requirement for forty hours of instruction and then additional instruction in ethics . The instruction is available in a classroom setting , cram courses and on-line . The examination in California is comprehensive and customized for each applicant . The examination covers the entire spectrum of life insurance and many applicants find it difficult .
In California you can become a car insurance agent by passing one of a couple of appropriate examinations conducted by the California Insurance Commissioner . Before taking the examination you must complete a specified course of instruction and a course on ethical behavior . Your state insurance commissioner probably has a website that details these requirements in your state . Finally , you must be appointed by an admitted insurance company in your state .
A life insurance physical exam is also known as a paramed exam . This is an underwriters opportunity to take a snap shot of an applicant 's current health . A nurse or paramed examiner will come to you and take a health history and perform a few tests . Some of the most common include height , weight , blood pressure , urinalysis , blood draw , mouth swab and pulse . Depending on age and amount of insurance they can require more testing such as an EKG . The paramed examiner submits the report and findings to the underwriter to compare to medical history and doctors records . You will find with underwritten life insurance plans this is a very common practice and is paid for with your normal life insurance premiums . Therefore there is no out of pocket charge for applying .
Typically , yes . But lets cover some of the what ifs . What if you had no history of cancer , but then unfortunately come down with it after you take the policy ? Youre covered . What if you had a history of cancer , but didnt disclose it to the broker when you applied ? Nor did you tell him or the examiner about any doctors who treated you ? Thats a big no-no . Thats insurance fraud . The carrier could contest the claim in the first two years . To tell you the truth , they might even come after you after that . What if you just completed cancer treatment last year ? Carriers typically like to wait 2 to 5 years before making an offer . However , I have seen offers made sooner , under exceptional conditions . What if you are a woman , and you have no history of breast cancer , but it runs in your family ? With all other things being equal , you could certainly be eligible for coverage now . But the family history might preclude you from getting the rock-bottom rates -LRB- sorry - blame the actuaries :-RRB- What if you have an accident-only policy ? No coverage for illnesses such as cancer . But what if you had cancer , but tragically the cause of death was a plane crash ? Different story .
It is best to disclose this to the paramedical examiner if you are concerned . It may or may not show up on a lab . If it shows up , more forms and possibly a closer look because a drug showed up in your labs and you did n't mention it . It is far better to disclose something small like this to keep it small . Honestly , not a big deal as you 've explained it . Just explain it the same way to the medical examiner and should n't be a problem .
The insurance commissioner in each state administers their own license exam . In California each test is different as questions are selected by a computer from a bank of about 5000 questions . It is very difficult to prepare for specific questions . The course requirements and materials differ from state to state but in California the mandated course was not enough to prepare a person for the examination . The examination required review and a thorough understanding of the concepts behind the products and enforcement of regulations .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
It is true that some states do not separate their life insurance license from their health insurance license , the majority of states do have these two license separate . To sell disability insurance requires a health insurance license . There is at least one state that considers disability a separate license but does so under the health insurance license so no further examinations are required . You may also take disability specific continuing education course credits to learn more and they will count in most states towards your CE points for both life and health license requirements .
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
That is a good question ! I 'm going to guess it 's one of two things , since there really is n't a policy directly named `` non-term '' . The first is Whole life , which differs quite a bit from a term policy , mainly in cost and duration . A term policy ends at a specified point in time , and a whole life policy ends when the insured does . The other answer would be a policy that does not require a medical examination , but relies on your answers on the application , and some checks on your medical history , and pharmacy records . I hope that was what you were looking for , if it 's not , inbox me , and I 'll try to help you further . Thanks for asking !
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The State Departments of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- regulate and oversee long-term care insurance sold and administered in each state . The General Accounting Office of the federal government -LRB- GAO -RRB- works in concert with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- to monitor the activities of the State DOI , and audit their work as it relates to payment of claims by individual insurance carriers , rate changes and approvals , and sales practices . In 2008 , the GAO released a report `` State Oversight of Rate Setting and Claims Settlement Practices '' involving 10 sample states on the topicand reported the following : `` Regulators in the 10 states GAO reviewed oversee claims settlement practices by monitoring consumer complaints and conducting examinations in an effort to ensure that companies are complying with standards . Claims settlement standards in these states largely focus on timely investigation and payment of claims and prompt communication with consumers , but the standards adopted and how states define timeliness vary notably across the states . Regulators told GAO that reviewing consumer complaints is one of the primary methods for monitoring companies compliance with state standards . In addition to monitoring complaints , these regulators also said that they use examinations of company practices to identify any violations in standards that may require further action . Finally , state regulators in 6 of the 10 states in GAOs review reported that their states are considering additional protections related to claims settlement . For example , regulators in several states said that their states were considering an independent review process for consumers appealing claims denials . Such an addition may be useful as some regulators said that they lack authority to resolve complaints where , for example , the company and consumer disagree on a factual matter , such as a consumers eligibility for benefits . '' Each state has a DOI website which includes a subsection on long-term care insurance sold in that state . Their Internet addresses are usually something like www.insurance . -LSB- abbreviation of state , like ` AZ ' -RSB- . gov.They can also be googled '' -LSB- Name of state -RSB- State Department of Insurance '' .
Some of the items and services that Medicare does n't cover include : < a title = '' Services that include medical and non-medical care provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living , like dressing or bathing . Long-term supports and services can be provided at home , in the community , in assisted living , or in nursing homes . Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age . Medicare and most health insurance plans do n't pay for long-term care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > Long-term care -LRB- also called < a title = '' Non-skilled personal care , like help with activities of daily living like bathing , dressing , eating , getting in or out of a bed or chair , moving around , and using the bathroom . It may also include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves , like using eye drops . In most cases , Medicare does n't pay for custodial care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > custodial care -RRB- Most dental care Eye examinations related to prescribing glasses Dentures Cosmetic surgery Acupuncture Hearing aids and exams for fitting them Routine foot care You can go to the medicare.gov website and check on the main page if any test , item or service is covered by Medicare .
When your life insurance or health insurance application is taken , your agent may ask you then for a time and date that you would like to take your exam , and order it for you . Or you may be asked for the time and date you want to set up your exam while doing a telephone interview with a representative for the life insurance company . In these situations , the company that does your exam -LRB- commonly called `` paramed '' companies -RRB- will later call you to confirm your appointment and provide you with a phone number you can call to make any changes . If your agent or case manager orders the life or health insurance exam for you without talking to you first , the paramed examiner will call you directly to set it up . If you do not hear from them within a few days after submitting your application , contact your agent .
end question
start question
annuities
Are Annuities Exempt From Creditors In California ?
In many states , Annuities are exempt from creditors up to a certain dollar limit . But this varies from state to state . It can also be very situation specific . It is best to consult with a lawyer who is familiar with CAs estate laws . Especially if this is a main concern when making the purchase .
There are assets protected from creditors by federal and/or state statute . Those assets are considered essential for the debtor to maintain at least a financial well-being . Creditor protection is balanced by the concerns for creditor 's rights to access the debtor 's assets . Annuities can be argued as a legitimate retirement plan like IRAs . Some states exempt annuities from the claims of creditors . Each state has differing views and regulations on the claims of creditors . Seek out legal counsel to determine what assets are protected from claims of creditors .
Life insurance must be distributed to a beneficiary and not the estate to remain exempt from the deceaseds creditors . The beneficiaries creditors would be able to go after the life insurance proceeds . Most retirement accounts and cash value within a life insurance policy are exempt from creditors and can be retained , even through bankruptcy . One way creditors sometimes get to the funds is if life insurance proceeds are deposited into what was a joint checking account that the creditor had access to . While a person may be able to have the funds returned through legal proceedings , it is often best to close the joint account and open a new account .
If the creditor is going after money owed by the insured person who passed away , the life insurance is exempt from creditors if the beneficiary of the policy was a person . Creditors can not take the life insurance proceeds from a beneficiary unless the beneficiary co-signed the debt with the insured person , or has debts of their own for which creditors are seeking payment .
Generally , the death benefit of life insurance in Mississippi is exempt from creditors as long as it it not left to the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , or if there are no living beneficiaries on the policy -LRB- causing the death benefit to go to the estate -RRB- , the life insurance proceeds will go through probate and creditors will not be exempt from going after those funds . Contact a lawyer about possible exceptions .
Most states allow a portion of Annuity funds to be exempt from creditors . For most states this amount is in the $ 250k - $ 300k range , however it does vary so check with your states Department of insurance , or with a local Attorney . Also , all Annuities have a Beneficiary designation in the event of death . This Beneficiary receives the Annuity funds free of probate . Which means that the deceased 's creditors can not touch them .
Only minimal protection exists for annuity contracts under federal bankruptcy laws . Beyond that , the answer will vary by State . Usually annuities have some heightened protection level due to being considered essential for the debtor 's family to maintain a minimum level of well-being and avoid becoming a burden to the State . If an annuity is an IRA , Roth IRA or similar retirement vehicle , it can receive even more protection . Here 's a list of states that offer 100 % exemption of cash values from variable annuities for creditor claims : Arizona , Florida , Hawaii , Maryland , Michigan , New Mexico , Oklahoma and Texas . Kansas offers 100 % exemption after holding the product for one year and Louisiana after nine months . As always , consult a legal representative to see your specific rights in your state .
While it appears simple on its face , the life insurance exemption from creditor claims can be very confusing . It is the opinion of some attorneys who specialize in life insurance law that the only way to truly protect life insurance proceeds from creditors of the insured is to have the policy owned by an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . Similarly , the only way to protect the proceeds form the creditors of the beneficiary is to have the proceeds paid into a discretionary spendthrift trust instead of directly to the beneficiary . Obviously these are issues that should be discussed with a qualified estate planning attorney . If you do n't know one , chances are that your life insurance agent will be able to refer you to one . This type of advanced planning may not be justified in ordinary circumstances . However if there is a good possibility that there could be claims by creditors of either the insured or the beneficiary , then the use of appropriate trusts should be considered .
Life insurance that is left to a person as beneficiary is usually exempt from creditors in South Carolina . If the beneficiary has co-signed for an unpaid debt at the time the Insured dies , then the creditors may be able to go after the insurance proceeds . And if the beneficiary is the Insured 's estate , creditors will try to collect their due from the insurance proceeds in the estate . But a person who receives a life insurance death benefit is not liable for the debts of the Insured .
Every state has differing rules on creditors . Most exempt life insurance death benefit proceeds from the claims of creditors . Creditors generally do not hold a position before the beneficiaries of a life insurance policy on benefits paid out . The policy beneficiaries receiving proceeds just before filing chapter seven and six months after may be ruled as property of the bankruptcy estate . Consult your bankruptcy attorney before relying on any information in this post .
Life insurance is exempt from creditors in Minnesota if the life insurance is left to a beneficiary other than the estate . If the life insurance goes to the estate -LRB- either on purpose or by default because all the named beneficiaries are dead -RRB- , the money will go through probate , where creditors can collect on it . If the life insurance is left to a person , creditors can not take it -LRB- unless perhaps the beneficiary was a co-signer to the Insured 's debts -RRB- .
In Canada , variable annuities are referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but there are differences . Which one is better depends on your objectives . Both offer diversified investment opportunities to build wealth . In addition , segregated fund policies provide important wealth protection , business and estate planning solutions . The key differences : Guarantees on your principal - The money you invest in a seg fund is guaranteed up to 100 % upon death or maturity . Locking-in market gains - Some seg funds allow you to lock in market gains -LRB- `` resets '' -RRB- that can increase the amount payable at death or maturity . Bypass probate - Seg fund death benefit proceeds are paid directly to a named beneficiary instead of your estate . This bypasses probate , a public process that can be both costly and lengthy . Creditor protection - By designating a qualified beneficiary on your seg fund policy , your investments maybe exempt from seizure by creditors in the event of unforeseen bankruptcy or legal proceedings . Segregated funds are well suited to : Business owners looking for creditor protection succession planning or emergency fund solution . Pre-retirees looking for wealth accumulation but want to limit potential losses with maturity and death guarantees . Pre-retirees and retirees looking to preserve their legacy and transfer their estate in the most private , timely and cost-effective way . If you have further questions . or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is addition information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca
Generally speaking , life insurance is exempt from creditors in Utah if the beneficiary is a person . If the beneficiary is the estate , then creditors can try to collect on the unpaid debt owed them from the life insurance proceeds . But they can not take the life insurance benefit from an individual who received it as a beneficiary , unless that person co-signed the debt .
Whether life insurance cash value is protected from creditors depends on what state the policyholder resides in . In the state of our home office -LRB- Arizona -RRB- , 100 % of the cash value of life insurance is protected from creditors when the policy has been in existence over two years and the beneficiary is a family dependent . In my home state of Nebraska , only $ 100,000 of the cash value is exempt .
In the state of Utah death benefit proceeds are exempt from creditors as long as the proceeds are paid to either the spouse or a child of the insured and the policy was in force for more than one year . Cash surrender values are protected from both bankruptcies and non-bankruptcies with the exception of monies placed into the contract one year prior to the creditor claim .
Life insurance is exempt from creditor in Connecticut if the beneficiary on the policy is not the estate . If the insured person passes away with debt , and the proceeds of his/her policy goes to the estate -LRB- either because the policy was set up that way , or because the beneficiaries are no longer living -RRB- , then the life insurance money will go through probate , where creditors can go after it . If the beneficiary is a person , they can not take it away from that person .
Life insurance proceeds that are left to a beneficiary are exempt from creditors in Kentucky , as long as the beneficiary is not a co-signer to the insured person 's debt . If the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is the estate , creditors can go after life insurance proceeds upon the insured person 's death .
Good question ! Creditor protection is an important concern , especially for the self-employed . There are basically two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Both are considered insurance products and as such can offer creditor protection under certain circumstances . Immediate annuities , as the name suggests , provide an immediate income stream in exchange for a lump sum . They are often used to provide a guaranteed income in retirement planning . Deferred annuities are accumulation products that have the option of an annuity at some point in the future . In Canada for example , they can be Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- , that are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GIC -RRB- or Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that are similar to mutual funds . With both types of annuities , in order to offer creditor protection , you would need to have been solvent when you put the money into the contracts . In other words , you would not have been trying to attempt fraud . If the above condition is met , the income flow from immediate annuities is afforded creditor protection . Deferred annuities , like insurance policies , receive creditor protection based on the beneficiary designation . Eligible beneficiaries include those in the `` protected class '' : spouse , parents , children and grandchildren . In addition , irrevocable beneficiaries also qualify . Please check with a lawyer for your individual situation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A debtor can collect on the proceeds of a life insurance policy if that party is the beneficiary of a policy . It can depend on what state you reside in as to whether your life insurance proceeds can be exempt , if you are beneficiary because of statues you should not have any problems . The Creditor would have to know also that the policy existed to be able to pursue the debt in this manner . There are state and federal statues regarding creditors rights in insurance . Insurance was developed to protect against contingencies that might financially interfere with the proceeds that were set up for someones loved ones .
In many states , Annuities are exempt from creditors up to a certain dollar limit . But this varies from state to state . It can also be very situation specific . It is best to consult with a lawyer who is familiar with CAs estate laws . Especially if this is a main concern when making the purchase .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Who Offers Medigap Coverage ?
Medigap or Medicare Supplement insurance coverage is offered by private insurance companies . All Medigap Plans are standardized , so the benefits with Plan F from ABC insurance company are the same exact benefits with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . Often times , Seniors are only aware of a few insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans . This is because of their heavy marketing techniques . In reality , there are many more insurance companies available and probably most of them you 've never heard of -- but since Medigap Plan benefits are standardized by CMS , it does n't matter what the name of the insurance company is . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can share which insurance companies are in your area and which ones have the best price . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you find Medigap coverage in your area .
The best way to determine who offers Medigap Coverage is to speak with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Plans -LRB- Medicare Supplement Plans -RRB- . A good agent will be able to show you all the top rated insurance carriers offering Medigap Plans and help you determine which plan would be the best fit for your specific needs . You can also visit our website for more information or give us a call .
There are many companies that offer Medigap plans , but not every company offers every plan and in every state . Most insurance companies have a handful of states they do business in for their Medigap plans and only sell several of the available plans -LRB- e.g. company XYZ only sells Medigap plans A , F , G , and N -RRB- . Since Medigap plans are standardized -LRB- meaning the coverage is the same , regardless of the company it 's through - the only difference being the price of the coverage -RRB- , it 's important to find out all of the carriers that offer plans in your zip code . Some of the big name companies in the Medigap marketplace include , but are not limited to , United Healthcare -LRB- parternered with AARP to use their name on their Medigap plans -RRB- , Omaha , WellPoint -LRB- Anthem and other Blue Cross carriers -RRB- , Aetna , Cigna , Humana , Central States Indemnity , Medico , New Era , Royal Neighbors of America , United American , and Equitable , to name a few - there are a number of other companies out there in the Medigap marketplace . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
There are many companies that offer Medigap plans , but not every company offers every plan and in every state . Most insurance companies have a handful of states they do business in for their Medigap plans and only sell several of the available plans -LRB- e.g. company XYZ only sells Medigap plans A , F , G , and N -RRB- . Since Medigap plans are standardized -LRB- meaning the coverage is the same , regardless of the company it 's through - the only difference being the price of the coverage -RRB- , it 's important to find out all of the carriers that offer plans in your zip code . Some of the big name companies in the Medigap marketplace include , but are not limited to , United Healthcare -LRB- parternered with AARP to use their name on their Medigap plans -RRB- , Omaha , WellPoint -LRB- Anthem and other Blue Cross carriers -RRB- , Aetna , Cigna , Humana , Central States Indemnity , Medico , New Era , Royal Neighbors of America , United American , and Equitable , to name a few - there are a number of other companies out there in the Medigap marketplace . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best way to compare prices on Medigap policies is to speak with an independent Medigap insurance broker . Independent brokers can sell Medigap policies from just about every company that offers Medigap plans . Since all Medigap plans are standardized and the only difference is price , you can compare plan F 's from every company that offers it in your zip code to see which carrier will offer you the coverage at the lowest possible cost -LRB- same goes for comparing plan G 's , N 's , etc. -RRB- . I would also compare the prices of plan Fs and plan Gs because the benefits are identical except plan G has a deductible of $ 147 -LRB- the Medicare Part B deductible in 2014 and 2015 -RRB- . If the difference in price is more than $ 12.25 per month , plan G would be a better deal for you . If the difference in price is less than $ 12.25 per month , then plan F would be a better deal for you . I would be happy to help you with your Medigap coverage and compare Medigap plans and quotes from every company offering them to you in your area - our agency is licensed in over 35 states and over 50 insurance companies . Please feel free to contact me for assistance . Thanks very much .
AARP Medigap plans are Medigap plans insured through United Healthcare . In short , AARP partnered with United Healthcare to attach their name to UHC 's products . As Medigap plans feature standardized benefits , the coverage under each Medigap plan is exactly the same as it would be if you purchased the coverage from another carrier . The main way the AARP Medigap plans differentiates themselves from other Medigap carriers is through their premium rating method . Most carriers determine their rates based on the attained-age rating method -LRB- your age at the time you apply with rates increasing as you get older each year -RRB- . AARP Medigap plans -LRB- insured through United Healthcare -RRB- are based on the community-rated method -LRB- everyone in an area pays the same rates regardless of their age - meaning an 85 year old is paying the same thing as a 75 year old -RRB- . Please note , the carrier also offers value-added services such as discounts for certain things such as eye exams and also offer a 24/7 nurse hotline , and silversneakers membership . You must be an AARP member to buy an AARP Medigap plan - membership can be attained during the application process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and comparison and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes ! Humana does offer Medigap plans . Of the 11 different plans in the marketplace , Humana offers Medigap plans A , B , C , F , G , K , L , N , and High-deductible F - please note , not every medigap plan may be available and may not be sold in every area . Medigap plans are the same from every company because they 're standardized by the government . The only difference between the coverage from each carrier is the price they charge for it . Price quotes are determined by the quoted plan -LRB- s -RRB- , your age , zip code , any tobacco usage , and marital status -LRB- some carriers offer rate discounts if married and if spouses applying together -RRB- . It 's important to compare the rates from every available option in your area -LRB- including Humana and every other insurer offering Medigap plans in your zip code -RRB- so you can secure your desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . If you need quotes for Humana 's Medigap plans -LRB- as well as those from other carriers to compare to as well -RRB- , please give me a call at 888-972-0024 - that connects to my office directly -LRB- not an automated system -RRB- . You can also send me an e-mail by clicking on the `` contact me '' button next to my name . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best Medigap insurance can be found with the company that offers the lowest premium for the Plan you want . It 's really that simple . All Medigap Plans are standardized . This means each lettered plan has the same exact benefits from one insurance company to the next ... the only difference is the price . CMS has safety nets in place for Seniors , so if you have a Medigap Plan your bills are going to be paid according to the benefits of your Plan . If you have Medigap Plan F , all your Medicare approved charges will be covered and you do not have to pay any deductibles or coinsurance . Medigap Plan G works just like Plan F and covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible . With so many insurance companies available who sell Medigap insurance , it is wise to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . That way you can choose the best Medigap Plan that is right for you .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
There is an `` open enrollment period '' during which you can buy any Medigap insurance policy -LRB- Plan F -RRB- sold in your state beginning the month in which you turn age 65 and you are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this six month open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap insurance offered , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people in good health . If you apply for Medigap coverage after your open enrollment period , there 's no guarantee that an insurance company will sell you a Medigap policy if you dont meet the medical underwriting requirements , unless you 're eligible because you have group health insurance through an employer or union . If this is your situation , the Medigap enrollment period begins when you sign-up for Part B . There are some situations if you are under 65 and are eligible for Medicare because of a disability you could be eligible for Medigap coverage . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and are under 65 , some states require at least one type of Medigap policy to be offered to you .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan at any point during the year - Medigap plans are not subjected to the same restrictions as Parts C & D of Medicare . You can complete an application up to 3 months in advance of the proposed effective date for the coverage - please note , you have to have both Medicare Part A & Part B to buy a Medigap plan . For example , if your effective date is April 1st , you could apply as early as January 1st . And vice versa - you can set the effective date up to 3 months later from the application date -LRB- most will set it up for the 1st of the following month though -RRB- . The effective date for your Medicare Part B coverage is also the starting point for your initial open enrollment period - a 6-month window where you can buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting -LRB- this is the best time to buy a Medigap plan -RRB- . Beyond this window , you will be required to answer health questions on the applications and go through medical underwriting -LRB- there are no exams though -RRB- , unless you have a qualifying event for a guaranteed-issue right . You should work through a broker who can shop the case for you and find you the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . It 's important to review your Medigap plan every year to see if a lower rate is available after the initial rate lock guarantee expires and/or when you have a rate increase . The benefits of a Medigap plan do not change from company to company - they are exactly the same . A plan F from one company features the exact same benefits as a plan F from another company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Which Dogs Raise Home Insurance ?
Rather than raise rates many companies restrict coverage . For example , the company might completely exclude coverage for personal injury or loss that comes beause you own a pit bull , Doberman , or Rottweiler . If you have an animal that has a history of biting , you will probably find that animal excluded as well . The company may also limit the amount that they will pay for any claim coming from the bite of any animal .
Most companies have a prohibited dog list . If you have one of these dogs listed below most home insurance companies will either not write the policy or issue a notice of non-renewal if discovered . If you have an animal liability endorsement , the coverage more than likely will not cover any prohibitive dog claim . Animal liability or `` dog bite '' liability will cover your dog that is not on any prohibitive list and has no bite history . Take a look at the list from one of the companies we represent . Akitas American Bulldogs Beaucerons Caucasian Mountain Dogs Chow Chow Doberman Pinschers German Shephards Great Danes Pit Bulls Rottweilers Staffordshire Terriers Wolf Hybrids This not a general list for all homeowners insurance companies . Each company may have their own list of prohibitive dog breeds . If you own a dog , it is best you first check your policy to determine if your homeowners policy covers any animal liability claim and if so , what is the sublimit of liability ?
It may . It is very difficult to say with absolute certainty as each carrier sets it 's own equations that determine their rate for any policy . Having a dog does raise the possiblity of having a liability claim due to a dog bite . Almost all carriers will ask if a prospect owns a dog and the breed of the dog . Contact a local agent to discuss coverage availablity and pricing within your area .
Most companies have a prohibited dog list . If you have one of these dogs listed below most home insurance companies will either not write the policy or issue a notice of non-renewal if discovered . If you have an animal liability endorsement , the coverage more than likely will not cover any prohibitive dog claim . Animal liability or `` dog bite '' liability will cover your dog that is not on any prohibitive list and has no bite history . Take a look at the list from one of the companies we represent . Akitas American Bulldogs Beaucerons Caucasian Mountain Dogs Chow Chow Doberman Pinschers German Shephards Great Danes Pit Bulls Rottweilers Staffordshire Terriers Wolf Hybrids This not a general list for all homeowners insurance companies . Each company may have their own list of prohibitive dog breeds . If you own a dog , it is best you first check your policy to determine if your homeowners policy covers any animal liability claim and if so , what is the sublimit of liability ?
In New York , one of the standard exclusions under the property coverages is something along the lines of ` animals , birds , and fish . ' If youown a valuable dog , a ` canine mortality ' policy would be appropriate to insure the value of the animal . There are also health insurance policies available for dogs . If you meant to ask ` Are dog bites/attacks and/or damage done by my dog covered underthe personal liabilityy section of a renters policy ? ' , the answer depends on a reading of your policy . Many carriers have a ` dog exclusion ' endorsement which voids liability for either all owned dogs or specific breeds . A competent agent or broker should -LRB- as a standard procedure -RRB- assess/survey your hazards and include questions to you about owned animals -LRB- especially dogs -RRB- as many carriers will not accept as new risks those individuals owning certain breeds of dogs . Always determine prior to purchase that the insurance policy you wish to purchase provides coverage for your exposures ; if the policy covers the liability exposure of the animals you own . If the policy application contains questions about animals , make sure they are answered completely and truthfully , you sign the application , and you retain a copy of the application -LRB- or anything else you sign - always and without fail -RRB- . If you can not obtain a copy , do not complete the transaction .
It depends on the company you go with . Assuming your landlord allows pets , most companies will not raise your rates for having a dog . There are some exceptions with some companies however . Some breeds like Pit Bulls , Rottweilers , German Shepherds and Dobermans have been , I think unfairly , considered higher risks of liability , therefore some companies will charge higher rates if you own one of those breeds .
This really depend on the size , breed , and prior history of the dog biting someone . This has become a huge issue in many states . You may encounter significant difficulty is insuring your home with a standard homeowners policy which includes liability coverage if there is history of biting or the dog is of a bred that has had a greater propensity to have been involved in attacks such as a pit bull . There is enough concern about this primarily because dog bites are often the second most likely cause of loss in many states for an individual carrier . Some carriers limit the liability coverage and some simply charge more if they perceive a more significant risk of loss . Dog owners should be aware that an absolute liability can exist in some states just by owning the dog.In other words the fact that you own the dog is sufficient to cause of liability for you and your carrier .
Dog bites would be covered under the liability portion of your homeowners policy . Dog bites have become a big deal over the last several years and dog bite can be a very expensive loss in some cases . For this reason many insurance companies have put exclusions on certain breeds of dogs and will not cover a dog bite . You would need to check with your specific insurance company to see if your breed of dog is covered should a dog bit occur . All agents should be having this discussion with the client before purchasing a policy .
Your best bet is to call the company directly and ask the question . Availability of liability coverage for dog bites is in a state of flux these days . Some companies exclude all or some breeds of dogs , some will offer a policy with a dog exclusion only if there has been any bite history . And when/if you find a company that will cover the dog , you can be certain that if there is an incident a dog exclusion or policy cancellation will follow . It is unfortunate but some breeds have a bad reputation because in many cases the owners should never have been allowed the privilege of dog ownership .
A dog bite should be covered under a homeowners insurance policy under the liability portion of the policy as long as . 1 -RRB- There is no dog exclusion on the policy 2 -RRB- You do not have what your particular insurance carrier would classify as a vicious dog at the time you purchased the policy . 3 -RRB- Vicious dogs are not excluded Since a dog bite is very serious and falls under liability I highly suggest you consult your agent if in fact you have a dog bite situation
That is a great question ! The answer is no , if your dog has been professionally trained , is not a breed known for violence , and you never have a claim filed because of him or her . The answer is yes , if you have a dog that falls underneath your company 's specified category for dogs at risk for claims from bites . Or worse , if you file a claim because your dog has bitten someone . It is always a good idea to call your agent before purchasing the dog , and find out if the dog can be covered , and to what extent . I hope that helps . Thanks for asking !
There are three levels to consider . If there is a dog with a history of biting , regardless of breed , that dog is probably excluded from coverage . If there are dogs at the residence that are pit bulls , wolf mixes , Doberman Pinchers , and Chows they are probably excluded . All other dogs have limited coverage . That means that in the case of a dog bite the normal limits of the policy do not apply . Check the back of your homeowners policy to see if there is an endorsement about pets or dogs .
Depends on several factors including the State involved , the relative underwriting policies of the various carriers and the breed of dog . Since there are more than 4.5 million dog bites each year in the U.S. with more than 50 % of them occurring on the dog owners ' premises , it is easy to see why this can be a huge issue with regard to dog ownership and homeowner insurance coverage . The liability coverage supplied in homeowners and renters policies is at risk depending on these factors . In most States , it depends on the breed of dog . Be upfront with a prospective or existing insurance carrier . Some carriers will increase your rates if you are an existing customer and others may refuse you as a customer . Others may be precluded from doing so , based on State regulations . Your agent can help you with this process and should be able to tell you the position of each carrier with regard to your specific breed of dog .
The answer is typically yes , but there are some Caveats > The typical renters policy is based on the ISO , Insurance Service Office developed HO 4 policy . So in effect a renters policy is more or less a homeowners policy without the house . Renters policies typically have a Section Two Liability Coverage which you review as to the limit of coverage and if there any significant restriction . Since dog bites are increasingly a major frequency issue for insurers , some have taken the position of carving out a restriction of coverage if certain dogs , dog breeds or size does not meet their standards . In Canada their are some Provinces have determined certain breeds to be against public policy and while they have not gone to putting down any dog of those breeds , but have taken the position that no new dog of certain breeds can be housed in that Province .
When ever I have discussed coverage options for a woman who is a stay at home Mom , we center on the value that her effort and dedication add to the running of that family home and the raising of the children in that home . We talk about the going rate for child care , home maintenance , and all the important things that seem so easily forgotten when one uses that phrase to describe that it means to be a stay at home Mom . We talk about what the impact , financially , it would be if she were to suddenly die . Would her spouse be able to walk into the boss and expect to receive an immediate 6 figure raise ? Probably not .
If your dog damages your apartment , you might have coverage under the liability section . Sometimes a company will put a form into your policy that would restrict the amount paid , or even deny coverage depending on the breed of the dog . If the dog that damages your rented property isnt your dog you can sue the owner of the dog .
That 's a great question ! Having a dog in and of itself might not affect your home owners rates , but owning specific breeds of dogs might . Depending upon your policy and company , there are some breeds of dogs that the insurer will deem as more of a risk to bite . That risk will affect the liability portion of your policy , and thus increase your rate . I 'd advise you to contact your agent , and see if they have a pet clause in your policy , and if your dog will invoke any or all of it . Hopefully it wo n't , and you will have many wonderful years with your furry companion ! Thanks for asking !
Most homeowners policies have an annual adjustment for the increased costs of construction . This raises the limits in the policy which also raises the premium . With each passing year the home grows older and that also affects the premium . Companies often reward customers who do not have claims and those discounts can have a substantial effect on your premium . Occasionally companies will file for and receive from the state insurance commissioner permission to raise the rates in a specific area due to losses that exceed the premiums received .
Yes , it can . It depends on the breed of dog that you have . Almost all insurance carriers have some restrictions on the dog breeds that they are willing to accept as part of a homeowners risk . If the dog has ever bitten or scratched someone that may also affect whether or not the carrier is willing to accept your homeas a risk with the dogs history . Please contact your local to find out if your carrier has any restrictions on dog breeds and what they may be .
If you are walking down the street and a pack of dogs attacks you , your homeowners insurance will not cover it . This would be a claim on your medical insurance . However , if you own a dog and your dog attacks someone not a member of your household , your homeowners liability coverage may cover the resultant medical and legal expenses . `` May '' is the operative word as some homeowners insurance companies exclude dog bite liability for all or some breeds . And even if yours does not exclude , they most certainly will following filing the 1st dog bite claim under the philosophy of where there 's smoke , there 's fire . One incident is a good indicator that another is likely . Talk to your insurance professional for your specific coverage or lack thereof !
end question
start question
annuities
What Is Wrong With Fixed Index Annuities ?
Fixed annuity products are not wrong in and of themselves . There are poorly constructed and low crediting rate annuities to be sure , but there are good ones as well . The annuity policy is only as good as the insurance company behind them and the annuity has to fit the product suitability of the policy owner .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Fixed annuities have fixed rate of returns credit once every year on your anniversary date . It is compounded normally daily . Then their are fixed index annuities that offer a fixed rate of return or one that is indexed to the indexes such as the Dow Jones or Nasdaq and several other indexes each insurance company has its own twist on its offering of index plans
Is an indexed annuity a fixed annuity ? No , not usually unless provisions exist within the indexed annuity to mimic a fixed annuity . With a fixed annuity you 're provided a set interest rate for the year from the insurance company . It is up to the company to come through as they 've committed themselves for that outcome . An index annuity on the other hand , has potential for a variety of returns established by the policy owner . A return could be as high as 10 % for a year or zero percentage based on how the individual creates the policy .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Some examples of annuities are : 1 -RRB- Fixed annuities that provide a minimum guaranteed return a. Fixed Immediate Annuities -LRB- you put in a lump sum and immediately start collecting payments -RRB- b. Fixed Deferred Annuities -LRB- you put in periodic premiums , then start receiving payments later -RRB- 2 -RRB- Variable Annuities whose returns are based on the market 3 -RRB- Indexed Annuities whose returns are based on a specified equity-based index
The annuity offerings change all the time . The best today maybe not be the best tomorrow . Annuities are categorized into basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Sentinel is a very good fixed interest rate annuity company . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Genworth is a very good index annuity company . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money . Prudential is a very good variable annuity company .
Yes , ING does sell annuities . They have a complete portfolio of annuities including : Fixed Annuities - a type of annuity that will pay you a fixed rate of return . Indexed Annuities - an annuity that credits interest based on the performance of an index . Immediate Annuities - this annuity is for someone with a lump sum of money who is interested in immediately turning that amount of money into a guaranteed income stream . Annuities are an important retirement planning vehicle with tax deferral , death benefit , and optional living benefits .
An immediate annuity is an annuity that begins immediate payouts of income . It can be fixed , indexed , or variable . A Fixed Annuity has a set interest rate that it will pay . An Indexed Annuity has a guaranteed rate which can increase based on the performance of stock index 's . A variable annuity 's interest rate is more closely tied to the stock market and is a little more volatile .
Annuities are among the safest forms of investment , particularly fixed or Indexed Annuities . Provided you follow the tax laws and contract , there is really very little risk of losing money . Fixed Annuities have a guaranteed interest rate . Indexed Annuities have rates based on the stock index performance but without the downside risk . Annuities are also the only retirement vehicles that can guarantee a lifetime income .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Take Out Life Insurance On A Grandparent ?
Yes , you can take out a life insurance policy on a grandparent in many situations . If you are contributing to your grandparent 's living expenses or health care through money or services , or if your grandparent lives with you , there will be no problem with purchasing life insurance for your grandparent . If you are not contributing to your grandparent 's financial situation , you still should be able to purchase a final expense policy -LRB- under $ 100,000 -RRB- for your grandparent . When purchasing simplified issue final expense insurance , it is often easier to purchase the policy if your grandparent is the owner of their own policy . It does not matter so much who is the payer .
As my colleagues have said , this is indeed possible . You simply have to show that , in a way , you have some sort of vested interest in the life of the person you are insuring . The insurance calls it , coincidentally enough , `` insurable interest '' , which really just means that you have a stake in wanting the person to live and be well . This is the true backing for that notion . It is to avoid certain people from taking out policies on other persons who they would have a vested interest in actually dying . Sad that this test of suitability had to be put in place , but it is there for a reason . Also as stated above , it is much easier if you put nearly everything in their name , pay for it , but agree on a mutually beneficial beneficiary .
If you mean paying premiums for a new policy for your grandparent where he/she will own and be the insured of the policy , yes , if he/she is insurable , of course . The premiums you pay may be gifts . If you mean to take out life insurance on his/her life but be the premium payor , owner and beneficiary , it is permitted under the rules of insurable interest as long as she is insurable and consents to the insurance . The insurance company may require justification of the insurance .
Yes , you can take out a life insurance policy on a grandparent in many situations . If you are contributing to your grandparent 's living expenses or health care through money or services , or if your grandparent lives with you , there will be no problem with purchasing life insurance for your grandparent . If you are not contributing to your grandparent 's financial situation , you still should be able to purchase a final expense policy -LRB- under $ 100,000 -RRB- for your grandparent . When purchasing simplified issue final expense insurance , it is often easier to purchase the policy if your grandparent is the owner of their own policy . It does not matter so much who is the payer .
Can you take out a life insurance policy on your grandmother ? That question , like most on this website , can not be answered with a straight yes or no . If your grandmother lives with you and you share in her income and expenses , you should be able to take out a policy of at least $ 100,000 on your grandmother . If you are buying a policy so that you can pay for her funeral , you should be able to take out at least $ 15,000 on her . If neither of those are the case , you may not be allowed to take out a policy on your grandmother . It depends on the circumstances , the company , and the type of policy you are buying . Insurance fraud often involves people taking out life insurance on older persons who have a short life expectancy , by younger people who have no financial interest in the lives of the Insured . Life insurance companies each strive to prevent that type of fraud in their own way , and thus you will find different regulations involving whether or not a grandchild can take out a policy on a grandparent . Suffice it to say that if the cause is legitimate , it is usually OK to take a life insurance policy out on a grandmother .
You can take out life insurance on your parents if the reason is other than financial gain . The amount that can be taken out will be based on the income and net worth of your grandparents , whether they are medically insurable -LRB- although even terminally ill grandparents can get small amounts of guaranteed issue coverage -RRB- , and if they consent to signing the application and doing the exam or phone interview that may be required . If you are the owner and/or beneficiary of the policy , the amount of coverage will also depend on reason for the policy . E.g. . You could take out a a policy on your grandparents if you live with them , and you would lose your home as a result of their passing . Or if you wish to pay for their funerals . Just ask your agent ahead of time so that it will all go smoothly and you do not put your grandparents through unnecessary stress applying for a policy that the insurance company may not approve .
You can take out a life insurance plan on anyone with whom you have an insurable interest . This means that the life of that person represents a financial benefit to you , or on the converse , that the death of that person would cause you a financial loss . There is also a degree to which insurable interest is determined by `` a substantial interest engendered by love and affection if closely related by blood or by law . '' This might allow you take out a small life insurance policy on your grandparents , but unless you invest in the care of your grandparents , there would not be insurable interest to take out a large policy on them .
To take out a life insurance policy on another individual you must have insurable interest . This means that you may face a financial loss upon the death of an individual . You must also have the consent and knowledge of that individual or parent of that individual . Common examples would be an adult child taking a policy out on their parents , an employer taking a policy on a key employee , a family member such as brother or sister taking a policy out on a sibling , a grandparent taking a policy on a grand child or some companies will even allow same-sex couples to take policies out on each other as long as insurable interest can be shown .
Getting life insurance on grandparents can be touchy . Life insurance is not meant to provide profit to the Owner of the policy , it is meant to prevent the Owner from suffering loss as the result of the Insured persons 's death . So if your grandparents are living with you , or you contribute to their living expenses , life insurance would be a reasonable way to repay you . If you do not contribute to their well being through money or services that would cost them money if you did not do it , then you do not have an `` insurable interest '' in their lives . This would make it difficult to be Owner of a policy on them for over $ 50,000 . However , most life insurance companies will allow grandchlidren to purchase a policy on their grandparents for final expense reasons . This is very common and a great way to ensure that the death of a grandparent does not cause undue hardship to the family .
You can take out life insurance on your grandparents on your grandparents under certain conditions . You will need their permission and you will need insurable interest . Insurance companies require that there be insurable interest before they will issue a policy . Essentially what it means is that you need to demonstrate that you would suffer financially form their death . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Funding a college education can be very expensive . Grandparents can help . The money that the grandparent saves should be in their name , not the students , unless you are using a Section 529 plan . The contributions that a grandparent makes to the childs education should be delayed until the final year of undergraduate education ; otherwise it is included in the Expected Family Contribution as determined from the FAFSA form . An annuity is a good way to accumulate these funds . One of the grandparents should be the annuitant .
While Annuities are Tax-Deferred , any withdrawal of the gain inside is taxed as income . So the first portion of the withdrawn funds will be subject to income tax . But your major problem is that it is likely that the mother will not be over 59 1/2 by the time the child goes to college . Annuities are subject to a 10 % penalty tax if the owner accesses it before age 59 1/2 . So on top of the income tax there will most likely be an extra 10 % tax added on . If you want to use an Annuity it is best to have the Grandparents as the Owners . You can do joint ownership between the grandfather/grandmother , or you could just have one as the Owner and the other as the beneficiary . Assuming that the grandparents are still living when the child goes to college , this would eliminate the 10 % penalty . But , you might want to look into a Permanent Life Insurance policy that builds Cash Value . The Cash Value will grow tax-deferred and can be accessed tax-free . If you take it out on the life of the parents , it would provide an extra layer of protection for the childs education . And you can expect 3 % -4 % growth if the policy is designed properly . Feel free to contact me at my website WEBSITELINK if you would like more info .
Yes . You can buy life insurance on your grandparents when several factors are met : 1 -RRB- They agree to allow you to take out a life insurance policy on their life 2 -RRB- There is an insurable interest for the coverage - -LRB- pretty straightforward for family members -RRB- 3 -RRB- The policy being applied for is suitable to the need - there are limits to how much coverage can be taken out a person -LRB- generally 20-30x income - exact maximum coverage allowance varies by carrier and by need -RRB- .
There are actually two common but different ways to assign life insurance . The first way to assign is with assigning the beneficiary for a temporary purpose . An example would be a financial institution loaning a substantial amount of money may require a person to assign them as beneficiary until the loan is repaid . Once this loan is repaid the assignment of beneficiary would go back to the original beneficiary , unless specifically changed again by the policy owner . The second common practice of assignment of life insurance is to assign a new owner of a policy . This is most common with cash value life insurance which a parent or grandparent purchased on a minor child . A minor can not own a policy with financial decisions , so an adult , usually parent or grandparent , will be owner until the child becomes an adult . The assign is made from the parent or previous owner to the insured child as the new owner .
Here are some factors that should be considered when purchasing long term are insurance : Family health history , family longevity , convalescent care of parents and grandparents . If your family has a chronic history of medical problems , it could present a predisposition for you . If you have family longevity with parents or grandparents , you have a greater need for extended care based on living longer . Its fascinating to observe one familys chronic convalesces versus another familys occasional use of assisted home care . And keep in mind that seniors pay around $ 250,000 in medical bills during their retirement years , some of which are extended care expenditures .
It is fairly inexpensive coverage . You may want to consider universal life or a child rider if the amount of death benefit is small . The market for child life insurance is sometimes driven by grandparents more than parents . Each life insurance company views child life insurance differently , so it pays to shop around . Keep in mind that life insurance companies take a dim view of parents who place life insurance on their children without having life insurance on themselves .
That is an excellent question ! The eventual collapse of Medicare and Medicaid has more than just economists worried . And I said eventual collapse , since I believe that it is much more likely that our current Government philosophy of income disparity politics will continue to prevent any kind of significant reform or refunding of those programs . Without overhauling , the system is predicted to bankrupt in 2024 . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- created a series of fat trimming cuts that in theory will add 5 years to the life of the programs . As of the 2012 Census statistics , 55 % of all seniors are currently at poverty level , and the statistics suggest that further cuts in just food stamps will double the currently 15 % of Americans living in poverty -LRB- 46.5 million households , and that number is woefully under estimated , as the formula for computing it is still based on 1963 data - bet you ca n't find a gallon of milk , or gas for what you paid in 1963 -RRB- . Jared Bernstein , a noted economist , calculates that the poverty rate will increase nearly 500 % when SSI tanks in 2030 . Now imagine the financial hardship on our Seniors , and our economy , when their medical expenses ca n't be paid for either . Something has to give , or we 'll be seeing our parents and grandparents out on the streets , or not at all . An interesting statistic ? 50 % of Americans combined own what the top 30 individual Americans do - $ 793 billion dollars . 47 % of Americans own nothing , their debt is equal to or greater than their assets . I 've been very blessed , God has been good to me and my family , but I 'm worried , and if you have parents or grandparents , you should be too , as millions of folks depend on it . Thanks for asking !
It is a challenge to come up with the money to bury someone who does not have life insurance or cash saved up for that event . Even with good intentions , savings can become depleted , putting family and friends in a difficult position . Most of the clients we 've had who have been involved in that type of situation , said they have taken up a collection among the family to bury their deceased relative . However , there are a few sources where you can help supplement funeral and burial costs . Social Security will pay a lump sum of $ 255 for a funeral if the deceased person qualified for SS benefits . Veterans can be buried for free in one of the nation 's 131 national cemeteries , and there are burial funds available for some eligible veterans . Read the criteria for receiving these benefits here : h WEBSITELINK Funeral homes like to be paid quickly , but you could reimburse those who donated after holding a sale of the deceased person 's belongings . Or perhaps memorials given could be applied toward the burial costs . Keep in mind that you can take out a policy on a parent , grandparent or other person for whom the costs of burial might fall on your shoulders . They just have to agree to and sign the policy . Perhaps if they understand the hardship being uninsured can put on their loved ones , they might consent to taking this step .
If you mean paying premiums for a new policy for your grandparent where he/she will own and be the insured of the policy , yes , if he/she is insurable , of course . The premiums you pay may be gifts . If you mean to take out life insurance on his/her life but be the premium payor , owner and beneficiary , it is permitted under the rules of insurable interest as long as she is insurable and consents to the insurance . The insurance company may require justification of the insurance .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Does Travelers Renters Insurance Cover ?
Travelers Insurance Company has an excellent renters insurance policy . The Form HO-4 covers Personal Property and Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant -LRB- insured -RRB- . Renters Insurance is a very valuable coverage because it no only offers protection against damage to your personal property but also protection against negligence and personal liability cases that may be brought against you . One valuable example is if there is fire , smoke or water damage to the rented home or apartment unit , the property owner 's insurance company will most likely attempt to collect damages from the tenant if they can prove negligence . In this case , Renters Insurance will provide the legal representation to handle the situation although the policy limit will apply . If you are not sure and do n't really want to commit to purchase renters insurance but may or may not be required to according to your lease agreement , the best way to generate the lowest annual premium is to select the minimum personal property coverage available , the lowest limit of personal liability and the highest available deductible for the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
One of the insurance carriers I represent is Travelers and yes , you can purchase Renters insurance through Travelers . I would look for a local agent who can assist you in placing a renters policy if you are interested . I am sure the local agent would be happy to quote Travelers if they have access and other carries as well .
In order to cancel Travelers renters insurance policy you would either contact your Travelers agent or Travelers directly to notify them of your request to cancel your renters policy . Most likely you will be asked to provide a letter in writing that is dated and signed to process the cancellation request .
Most health insurance plans give some coverage overseas . The extent of the coverage in most cases is determined by looking at the event as life threatening.If that is the case , then emergency room visits would be covered.What is important for the traveler to know is that most doctors and hospitals in foreign countries want payment up front for services at the time of the visit . One instance I know of that happened to a traveler in Panama was a traveler went to the hospital and was required to pay $ 5,000 up front as a deposit before they would treat them . The traveler has to file claims after the fact and wait for a reimbursement . If you are covered by Medicaid or Medicare , there is no coverage outside the U.S. except Medicare will cover emergencies in Canada if they happen while en route to Alaska . When traveling outside the U.S. and on cruises the best course of action is to purchase a medical policy specifically for coverage overseas . These policies are very economical and offer an array of terms and choices . One of the most important services is to have a multilingual customer service agent who can help you locate medical services , deal with currency exchanges , manage claims and can co-ordinate services 24/7 . There are many companies that provide these insurance policies . I represent International Medical Group -LRB- IMG -RRB- who has many choices for nationals and foreign nationals that travel globally for business or pleasure . They have been in business for over twenty years and concentrate solely on this market . The United States Consular Bureau of Affairs also has a list of companies that provide these policies .
To determine the value of a travel insurance policy review the coverage that you currently have . Some people have coverage that extends to the locality where they live , or the state in which they reside . Coverage outside of that specified area can be highly limited . The issue becomes more severe with most plans when you travel overseas . If your current coverage is inadequate to cover potential difficulties secure a travel insurance policy . Personally , I travel overseas frequently and never purchase travel insurance .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- does not normally cover medical expenses while you are traveling overseas . Some Medicare Supplement plans can be used during overseas trips . There are also some instances where Medicare will cover foreign travel , e.g. travel through Canada on the way to Alaska .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Renters insurance covers the theft of things inside your vehicle , as that is personal property not car insurance . Renters insurance would not cover the car itself , that is car insurance . Also , renters insurance travels with you , so like on vacation or a cruise and some of your personal items are stolen .
Travelers Insurance Company has an excellent renters insurance policy . The Form HO-4 covers Personal Property and Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant -LRB- insured -RRB- . Renters Insurance is a very valuable coverage because it no only offers protection against damage to your personal property but also protection against negligence and personal liability cases that may be brought against you . One valuable example is if there is fire , smoke or water damage to the rented home or apartment unit , the property owner 's insurance company will most likely attempt to collect damages from the tenant if they can prove negligence . In this case , Renters Insurance will provide the legal representation to handle the situation although the policy limit will apply . If you are not sure and do n't really want to commit to purchase renters insurance but may or may not be required to according to your lease agreement , the best way to generate the lowest annual premium is to select the minimum personal property coverage available , the lowest limit of personal liability and the highest available deductible for the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
I am going to make a different assumption from Julie on this and go with a travel MEDICAL insurance plan vs. auto . Travel medical insurance is designed to supplement your major medical or Medicare plan when you travel outside the United States . Most major medical plans have worldwide coverage but there are some expenses that are not covered by major medical . These would include med evac , translation of medical records and return of mortal remains . Some Medicare Advantage plans have out of country coverage but if you have original Medicare your out of country coverage is limited . It would be wise to purchase an international travel medical plan .
It is not a matter of what countries accept Medicare . Medicare is a United States provision and Medicare dictates what it will pay . Medicare does not cover travel outside of the United States with very few exceptions , primarily certain emergency situations . Some Medicare Advantage Plans and Medicare Supplements offer some foreign travel coverage .
Travelers is often used to describe Travelers Indemnity Company . That company does not offer life insurance . However , Travelers Life and Annuity is a company that used to sell Life Insurance , and was acquired by the MetLife Life and Annuity Company of Connecticut in 2005 .
In my personal opinion Travelers home insurance is a superior product . Also Travelers has excellent customer service and claims handling . As an independent agent I work with many different companies and the one that rises to the top and receives praises from my clients continually is Travelers Insurance . Make sure to discuss the details with an agent as Travelers has several package options ranging from Silver to Platinum .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Most US based health insurance plans have out of country coverage . Keep in mind that provider network rules do not apply when traveling out of the country and in some cases you may be required to file your claim directly with the carrier so you can be reimbursed for your out of pocket expenses . When traveling outside of the US , even for a short time period , it is wise to consider international travel insurance to supplement your existing health plan . In addition to covering some of your deductible and other out of pocket expenses , a good international medical plan will cover things like med evac , return of mortal remains and translation of medical records . These items are almost never covered by traditional health insurance plans .
Most health insurance plans , including major medical , supplemental health plans and Medicare do include coverage for individuals on a cruise . A cruise that is limited to the coastal United States and does not venture in to international waters is fine , but once you leave the states your coverage may have limits . Medicare beneficiaries with certain Medigap plans and traveling outside the United States have $ 50,000 of supplemental benefits . Some Medicare Advantage plans also include coverage outside the states Anyone traveling out of country should consider an international travel medical plan to supplement their regular health insurance -LRB- including Medicare -RRB- .
Travelers Insurance Company covers standard Home Insurance Forms approved by each individual state in which theywrite homeowners insurance . Themost common form of Homeowners Insurance is the Form HO3 used to issue policies on Single Family Dwellings which are the primary residence of the titled owner . Travelers has a selection of endorsements which can be added to the policy inclusivebutnot exclusive of Replacement Cost Contents , Extended Dwelling Replacement , Water Backup , Liability Extension to Additional Residence , Personal Injury , Increased Limits for ValuableBelongings and many more ... . For Travelerscoverage in CA , AZ & NV , connect with : WEBSITELINK or call : -LRB-877-RRB- 931-3368 For all other States , contact your local Travelers Insurance Agent forassistance .
When you travel outside the US your health insurance follows you but it does not cover all contingencies . There are no networks outside of the US so your policy becomes a reimbursement contract . You should consider supplementing your major medical plan with an international travel plan to cover things like med evac and translation of medical records .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Social Security Disability Insurance Program ?
Social Security defines a disability as expected to last at least one year or to result in death and prevents one from doing any substantial , gainful work . Through our Social Security system here in the United States , benefits are available for workers -LRB- and their families -RRB- who have earned enough work credits to be eligible for Social Security disability benefits . What that means is that the individual must have a proven work record of credits in order to qualify for disability benefits under Social Security , and they must have paid into the system in order to obtain a benefit from it . -LRB- For young workers , the criteria are a little different because of their limited time in the employment market . -RRB-
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
Social Security Disability Insurance is a payroll tax social program . It falls under the pervue of Social Security Administration . It provides income to people who cant work because of a disability . Social Security Disability can be temporary or permanent benefit . Social Security Disability does not depend on the income of the disabled individual receiving it .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 1 1/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
There are two different Social Security disability programs , and several different types of life insurance . Social Security Disability Insurance pays benefits to people who worked and paid into the system . Having life insurance does not impact your ability to qualify for this program . Supplemental Security Income is a needs based program . There are complex income and asset limitations . In general anyone with assets exceeding $ 2,000 is not qualified to receive benefits under SSI . Cash value life insurance policies owned by the individual may be considered assets , and could disqualify the person until sold . Term life policies have no cash value and would not impact eligibility .
You can not get on Medicare before age 65 unless you are on Social Security Disability and have Lou Gehrig 's Disease ; have been receiving Social Security Disability benefits for 24 months ; or you have worked long enough in a federal , state or local government job and meet the requirements of the Social Security Disability program . Some disabled widows and widowers , or divorced disabled persons , may be able to get Medicare under age 65 under some conditions .
Retirement , Survivors , and Disability Insurance is a reference to three of the benefits that Social Security pays to those who have paid into Social Security taxes . The `` retirement '' part refers to Social Security income that people get when they retire . the `` survivors '' part refers to the Social Security income benefits paid to dependents of a qualified deceased person . And the `` disability '' part refers to Social Security Disability benefits disabled persons receive if they are qualified .
If you qualify for Social Security Disability and are disabled for two years you will qualify for Medicare . I have many clients on Medicare and Social Security Disability . The key here is Social Security Disability . If you are collecting on a private disability policy and you are not yet on Social Security Disability then you can not get Medicare .
Under the Affordable Care Act , coverage is available to everyone through various programs including the Health Insurance Marketplace which is a great place to start if you are unemployed whereas coverage is not available to you from an employer . In addition , there are state programs that you may qualify for such as Medicaid . These programs are based on income eligibility , and you can see if you qualify and apply at your local Department of Health and Human Services office . If you are unemployed due to a disability , you may qualify for Medicare , regardless of age , through the Social Security Administration . However , their definition of `` disability '' is much stricter than many other programs . You can apply by phone or in person at any local Social Security Office or online at ssa.gov . Finally , many hospitals offer free or low cost health care based on income eligibility . They often follow a sliding-fee arrangement or offer free clinics for those in financial need . These clinics often provide care from volunteer doctors who are giving back to their community by offering care to those in need at no cost and are a great resource if you are in need of medical attention .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
There are two products provided through Social Security : 1 -RRB- Social Security Disability Insurance and 2 -RRB- SSI , or Supplemental Security Income . Social Security Disability Insurance -LRB- commonly referred to as `` Disability '' is for people who have become disabled . They will get Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . Those on SSI are disabled or blind and also have limited income and resources . In most states , they are usually automatically eligible for Medicaid when they go on SSI .
State disability insurance is a government mandated program that many people mistakenly believe they have , but do n't . Only five states require private workers to participate in a short term disability program : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . Forty five states do not have mandated state short term disability . Social Security Disability Insurance is managed at the state level , but is a federally funded program . Temporary disabilities are not covered .
The social security number is a necessary method of identifying you and your record . Most insurers use this number to zero in on your identity . Unfortunately , your social security number is used to identify you and your record to insurance carriers , and just about every other kind of business that is granting credit or coverage . Would n't it be nice to be able to protect this one vital bit of information and have another identifying number we could use ? But I digress ... But , as identifiers go , the social security number is probably the best current way for your creditors and insurance companies to make sure you are really you . Insurance is making a bigger and bigger use of credit base underwriting and pricing every year and most carriers use credit to one extent or another in insurance eligibility and pricing . Companies are also using vast data base records of claims and driving history that are often cataloged by your address , your name , your spouse , former addresses , and even the prior owners and subsequent owners of cars you have once owned and insured . With all the potential for confusion , your social security number is one unique bit of information that is n't easily duplicated in these claims and records databases . So , in that one way , your social security number helps keep you from being lumped together with others who may have a similar name , owned your car , or lived in the same house or apartment . Your social security number has been tied to credit reports and your borrowing for decades so insurance companies use this number to be as certain as possible they are looking at your record and not someone with a similar name . While the social security number has now been exploited for way to many reasons of identification , it is good that you still have one way to separate yourself from others with similarities that can cause confusion in underwriting and pricing your insurance and that is a good thing . Hope this helps .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
Yes , people can collect Social Security Disability benefits , and do not have to buy private Disability Insurance to get cash while being disabled . However , to get Social Security disability benefits you must generally be disabled for at least a year , and be unable to work -LRB- or be trained to work -RRB- at any job . Private Disability Insurance pays benefits more quickly . Also , with DI , if you have the `` own occupation '' feature , it pays if you can not work at your OWN job , not just ANY job . Finally , private disability insurance pays a higher benefit than Social Security DI . You can even supplement SSDI with DI .
end question
start question
annuities
What Are Bonus Annuities ?
Tax deferred annuities have differing crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indexed crediting and separate sub account crediting and debiting , i.e. you could lose money . But in addition to crediting methods , some annuities actually credited a one year bonus at the beginning of the terms of the annuity . That bonus is generally applicable for the guaranteed income rider or vested over the contract period of the annuity .
Bonus annuities are annuities that pay a bonus to the contract owner generally as an incentive to start the annuity . This bonus is generally paid as bonus to the interest rate in the first year of the annuity . These benefits can greatly improve yield on the cash in the annuity . Some care should be taken when considering these annuities as they often come with recapture charges if the owner cashes in the annuity within a few years from opening it -LRB- i.e. the bonus will be forfeited -RRB- .
Whenever you are comparing advertised rates of fixed annuities , it is very important to know the details behind the advertised rate . There are a multitude of variables between different companies . Many companies offer `` bonus rates '' for new investors . These bonus rates look very attractive , but are easily misunderstood . Key questions to ask are : Does the advertised rate include a bonus ? If so , what are the details ? How long is the advertised rate locked in once you invest ? Is there a guaranteed minimum interest rate ? If so , what is it ? Is there a bail-out option if the earning rate drops significantly in the future ? What are the terms ? For the right person in the right situation a fixed annuity can be a very good investment . However properly comparing annuities is more involved than comparing simpler products such as CD 's .
Tax deferred annuities have differing crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indexed crediting and separate sub account crediting and debiting , i.e. you could lose money . But in addition to crediting methods , some annuities actually credited a one year bonus at the beginning of the terms of the annuity . That bonus is generally applicable for the guaranteed income rider or vested over the contract period of the annuity .
A terminal bonus -LRB- or capital bonus , or final bonus -RRB- can be paid upon maturity of a mutual policy . This is a feature of some `` with-profit '' Whole Life policies in Europe and Canada and other countries in the Commonwealth of Nations . It is comparable to a final dividend in the US .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
That is a great question ! They can , but it may not be your best option , depending upon how long you 've had the annuity . Anytime you surrender an annuity , you will pay some form of fee or charge . -LRB- The insurance company does this to recapture some of the lost income they would have generated , and cover costs . -RRB- Your annuity in the first years will have a `` surrender period '' where these charges are very steep . They do this , as an incentive for you to actually derive a benefit from your annuity . The charges can vary widely , but generally start at 10 % plus fees , and gradually reduce as time goes on . If there was a bonus added to your annuity , this amount typically is removed or reduced also . You could stand to lose a big chunk of what you 'd invested . If you need quick cash , there are some better ways . If you would like to contact me , I 'd be happy to go over this in more detail with you . Thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! There are good things and bad things about any retirement product . Annuities are certainly a great retirement vehicle , but you want to be sure that it is the right one for you . The positives for annuities are that they can generate a good sum of money safely for you , that the payments to you can be structured so that you can not outlive them , -LRB- a huge plus , to know that you will have an income stream that lasts as long as you need it -RRB- , and that many companies will add a bonus to your annuity that further increases your yield . The negatives are that they typically require a lump sum payment to begin them , that the deposit can not be touched -LRB- with some exceptions , but really should n't be touched -RRB- for several years without large fees and consequences , and that if you are n't careful , the annuities yield may not be enough to outpace inflation , resulting in ultimately a poor investment vehicle . My personal advice to my clients is always that this product needs to be a good match for you to consider it . Cash flow can not be an issue for you , and that we need to look carefully at which annuity is best for you . The right annuity is a great investment , and the peace of mind that comes with knowing you wo n't run out of money is priceless . I hope that helps , please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more personalized information , okay ? Thanks for asking !
That 's a good question ! Generally the answer is no - if you are referring to premiums on life insurance for yourself . However there can be exceptions such as in Buy-Sell agreements . But in that case you 're buying insurance on someone else . There is a way to deduct for life insurance premiums however , but it 's not direct . If you pay bonuses to yourself or an employee equal to the amount of premiums you can deduct the bonus as a business expense , but of course you or the employee would need to pay income tax on the bonus .
A No Claims bonus is something that is more common with car insurance than health insurance . Think of it as the `` Good Hands Discount '' that good drivers receive , in the form of lower monthly premium payments , in exchange for not having accidents or other driving problems . While a No Claim Bonus is available in some other countries , and did exist in the U.S. in the past , such a practice is no longer allowed under regulations contained in the Afford Care Act that state insurance companies can not charge different premiums to people based on their health or claims history .
Life insurance as a standalone product is not deductible . However , life insurance in a qualified plan is deductible . The life insurance portion of the annual contributions can use whole life -LRB- 49.5 % -RRB- or universal life -LRB- 25 % -RRB- . In 419 DBO plans life insurance is strictly a death benefit product and can also be deductible . Executive bonus plans can compensate an employee in a bonus arrangement , but the purchase of the life insurance is outside the corporation , but may as a balance sheet transaction may in end with the same result .
The simple answer to your question is that insurance premiums ARE NOT a deductible expense for anyone . However , depending upon the use of the insurance , for instance , as part of an Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan -LRB- SERP plans -RRB- , there are tax benefits -LRB- deduction -RRB- to the employer realized when the policy 's cash value is paid out to the employee . Additionally , administrative costs may be tax-deductible as a business expense . Separately , under anexecutive bonus plans where the bonus is paid directly in the form of premium payments to the insurer for policies owned and FBO of the executive , the employer has no ERISA reporting , potentially tax deductible costs and can avert tax rules applicable to Qualified Pans and employer owner line insurance . Please feel free to contact me through my profile if you have additional questions .
It 's usually about 4 % to 6 % . And it depends on whether the annuity has a fixed account tied to it . But the you need to calculate how much bonus commissions are available . Someone who is securities licensed sells variable annuities . I 'm not a fan . Obviously . Variable annuities are expensive .
Investing in annuities has become very popular over the last decade . There are many types of annuities -LRB- fixed , variable , immediate etc. . . -RRB- so it is critical to find the insurers that are the safest and give you a policy that is suitable to your needs . A full-time broker or financial planner that is active in the business is your best resource . The more experience they have is a bonus amd they can shop and explain your best options .
Annuities are used in these 10 places plus more : 1 -RRB- The annuitant 's retirement years , as an income stream . 2 -RRB- In an IRA , to fund it . 3 -RRB- If self employed , in a Keogh-type retirement plan . 4 -RRB- Pensions plans , when used by businesses to fund them . 5 -RRB- Next to a pension plan , to supplement it . 6 -RRB- After the sale of a home or business . 7 -RRB- By grandparents , to pass money to grandchildren . 8 -RRB- If a variable annuity , for growth . 9 -RRB- When receiving a lottery prize , life insurance proceeds , or bonus . 10 -RRB- When unable to qualify for life insurance .
That is a very good question ! You are kind of between a rock and a hard place . If you contact them , and have a ` safe driver ' bonus , you could lose that , and with the subsequent rate increase , -LRB- if there is no first accident forgiveness plan -RRB- you might well exceed the expense of the repairs . On the other hand , if you do not know the person that she hit wo n't be the type that later claims back injuries or some such thing , and takes you to court -LRB- I 'd wonder about this if he or she documented and/or took pictures , and your wife did n't -RRB- , without the power of your insurance company behind you , you could be in a bigger mess . Another consideration is your deductible - if it 's more than $ 700 , you would end up paying that much anyway , and run the risk of a rate increase . If coming up with $ 700 is an issue , and you have a low deductible , then having the insurance company pay may be an option . Perhaps a good thing to do might be to contact your agent , and tell them you and your wife were talking about what would happen if one of you were to have an accident , and were not sure what would happen if so , and have them explain it to you . If it sounds good , then do it , if it sounds bad , then consider your risks of handling it out of pocket . Personally , I 'd probably call them , and explain it exactly as it happened , and trust my agent to what is best for me . I hope it works out for you , good luck , and thank you for asking !
If you have a traditional IRA , anyone can convert to a Roth IRA . He is the rub however , because the traditional IRA is tax-deferred and the ROTH IRA is pre-taxed , you will have to pay taxes on the amount you with to convert to the Roth . There may be strategies available which can help you to pay for that tax , through bonus which may be received on certain Fixed Indexed Annuities . If you are considering Converting a traditional IRA into a Roth , I recommend you call your adviser or reach out to me .
I know that postal workers have group life insurance , but the one thing many postal workers over look is there life insurance can increase over 300 % through out your career and after retirement start to decrease when i ` ts needed the most . What i recommend is do a review of your life insurance policy , because any bonus that you may want or think is available really wont matter if your life insurance decreases every year in retirement .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The exact price depends on what state and county you are living in , but your cheapest option other than the fine , will be a catastrophic plan . Catastrophic plans carry high deductible and out of pocket expenses , but is the lowest level and cheapest insurance option available . I highly recommend you find a local licensed and certified health insurance broker that can shop around for you , for both plans inside and outside of the new exchanges . They will also be able to advise and assist you with premium assistance applications to help pay for the insurance . Plus they can save you the time and headache of trying to get on the glitchy government website yourself , and getting frustrated . And the bonus , their service does n't cost you anything , so why not use an agent or broker !!! But , do n't get to stressed yet , you have until March 31st , 2014 to shop around and purchase a plan , to avoid the penalty .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Health Insurance Elastic Or Inelastic ?
I believe that health insurance is neither elastic or inelastic . The amount of insurance most people purchase has little to do with the actual cost of the coverage . In most cases the person making the purchase decision is not the individual paying for the coverage . People can pay widely different amounts for the very same level of coverage . When the coverage is purchased through work the person 's employer is making a portion of the premium payments on behalf of the employee . Any remaining contribution is paid for by the employee using pretax payroll deductions . The IRS is then picking up a portion of the tab in the form of a tax subsidy . When individuals purchase coverage through a state exchange they may be eligible for premium and cost sharing subsidies . The subsidies are based upon the household 's income compared to the federal poverty level .
I believe that health insurance is neither elastic or inelastic . The amount of insurance most people purchase has little to do with the actual cost of the coverage . In most cases the person making the purchase decision is not the individual paying for the coverage . People can pay widely different amounts for the very same level of coverage . When the coverage is purchased through work the person 's employer is making a portion of the premium payments on behalf of the employee . Any remaining contribution is paid for by the employee using pretax payroll deductions . The IRS is then picking up a portion of the tab in the form of a tax subsidy . When individuals purchase coverage through a state exchange they may be eligible for premium and cost sharing subsidies . The subsidies are based upon the household 's income compared to the federal poverty level .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Health Insurance is a Privilege ; it is a privilege to have #healthinsurance which is a benefit in many ways . If an insurance company insures a person in return for a premium paid , the insured person now has the benefit of lower health costs due to agreed upon health tariffs negotiated between the insurance carriers and health providers , in addition , the insured person will only be responsible for a portion of the now lower fees for health services received . In areas of socialized health care , the Government or Employers may be paying the premiums for the same benefits explained above . The outcome is always better when everyone is insured since it lowers the overall ` risk ' taken by the insurance companies ; with better health care , comes better health , lower risk , lower premium and a greater public awareness of the ability to promote better health care options . For more information regarding Health Insurance , you may visit : WEBSITELINK
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
PPO is not a type of health insurance . It is an abbreviation for Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- which describes the network provider contracting approach associated with whatever health insurance plan you are purchasing . PPO network based health insurance products have dominated the marketplace for many years so it is not unusual for the consumer to blend the two . After January 1 , 2014 you will want to have your health insurance agent check for you , or if you are a `` do it yourselfer `` do someresearching online to determine the type of provider network associated with health plans you may be interested in . The traditional features of PPO plan designs have been to have office visit & prescription copayments , lower deductibles , higher co-insurance levels and lower out-of-pocket financial exposure for using in-network PPO providers while still having coverage for voluntary usage of non-network providers at reduced benefit levels . PPO plans are the dominant network arrangement in the current health insurance marketplace . However , changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , are causing insurance carriers to re-design their products and this does extend to the design of their provider networks . This is especially true of the health insurance products sold in the government health insurance marketplaces where the consumer may encounter multiple network or sub-network type provider arrangements in this environment . For instance , here in Tennessee , the BC/BS plan offers essentially the same insurance products with pricing based on your choice of 3 different PPO networks at 3 different price points . The larger the PPO provider network you choose the higher the insurance premium associated with the product . In fact , the smallest of the 3 BC/BS network options is offered only in the government marketplace . So , these are words of caution , there are degrees of difference even within what are technically PPO based products these days . Do n't just assume that a provider is going to be in-network with an insurance carrier based upon your past experience . Verify with both the insurance carrier and the doctor 's office that they are a participating provider . Also , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace starting in 2014 , you will want to be aware of the growing move back to Point-of-Service -LRB- POS -RRB- , Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- and Accountable Care Organization -LRB- ACO -RRB- based provider delivery systems associated with a growing number of health insurance products . These other variations on the theme apply more stringent guidelines to provider access in a variety of ways -LRB- reduced network sizes , gate keeper referral arrangements , sharply reduced or no out-of-network coverage -RRB- and introduce entirely new considerations for the consumer .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- are good plans if you are in good health and not using a lot of medical services . In Alabama where I practice MA Plans have high out of pocket cost for people with serious or chronic health problems , as much as $ 6700 in a calendar year . The problem I see with MA Plans is that people start out using them when they are in good health but once your health changes and you have to use your MA Plan more and more you become unhappy with your out of pocket cost for Medicare covered services . If you become unhappy with your MA Plan and want to switch to a Medicare Supplement you may not be able to if you have serious health problems or you may pay a much higher premium because of your health . My professional recommendation is to get a Medicare Supplement even if you are in good health because you need a Medicare Health Plan that not only meets your needs today but will continue to meet your needs as you get older and your health care needs change . If you wait until you need a Medicare Supplement because your health has changed you may not be able to . Insurance companies that offer Medicare Supplement Plans can and do turn down people that have serious pre-existing health conditions .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is A 457 Retirement Plan ?
457 deferred compensation plans that allow pretax contributions . The earnings accumulate tax deferred and allow you a catch up contribution of $ 5,500 you are age 50 or older . 457 -LRB- b -RRB- deferred compensation plans that are available in government and non-government organizations under 501 -LRB- c -RRB- . 2013 contribution limits are $ 17,500 .
Assuming youre referring to 457 -LRB- b -RRB- retirement plans , 457 -LRB- b -RRB- deferred compensation plans that are available in government and non-government organizations under 501 -LRB- c -RRB- . Theres no 59 penalty as long as the plan participant is retiring or ending employment . Government 457 can be rolled personal over to IRAs . Nonprofit workers can only roll their 457 plans over to another 457 plan . 2013 contribution limits are $ 17,500 and an extra $ 5,500 if you are age 50 or older .
A 457 plan is a deferred compensation , non-qualified tax deferred-compensation retirement plan .457 -LRB- b -RRB- plans are used by state and local governments and 501 -LRB- c -RRB- organizations . 457 plans has similarities to defined contribution plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , but no 10 % penalty for withdrawals before age 59 . 457 plans are predicted on deferring income .
Section 457 plans are nonqualified deferred compensation plans available only to state and local government employers , and nongovernment organizations exempt from tax under IRC Section 501 . Generally 457 plans are utilized for two reasons - 1 . As deferred compensation plans that allow participants to reduce their taxable salary in a manner similar to that of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans generally are not available to state and local government organizations . 2 . As supplemental benefit plans that provide executives with supplemental retirement income .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- Plan EmployerInformation - What is a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan ? Its a great benefit to both your employees and you!A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-deferred plan that can be set up forany public school , university , college or non-profit 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organization . Generally , any employee may participate as away to invest for retirement . A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan benefits more than just your employeesIt benefits your organization . Help reward and retain loyal employees while attractingnew , well-qualified ones . Maintain a positive work environment and enhance yourreputation as a progressive , caring organization , with littlecost to you . It benefits you in your goal to prepare for yourown retirement . You will have a high-quality plan to build a supplementaryretirement income while saving on taxes today . You have the ability to choose from a wide variety ofinvestment options to fit your goals . How does a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan work ? Contributions - You and your employees can contribute money on a pre-taxbasis . This means you can afford to contribute more than ifyou put money aside after taxes were deducted . And , unlike ataxable investment , earnings on the account compound taxfree until the money is withdrawn . Then both contributionsand earnings will be treated as taxable income . A pre-taxcontribution of up to $ 17,500 may be made in 2013 . Forthose 50 and older , a catch-up contribution of $ 5,500 maybe made . Additional catch-up contributions may be madeby those with at least 15 years of service with a qualifiedemployer . These limits may increase in future years.You may be able to contribute to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan as well , and double your contributions . For example , in2013 , the maximum contribution to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan is normally $ 17,500 . That can be combined with the403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan normal contribution limit of $ 17,500 for a totalof $ 35,000 invested tax deferred . Catch-up contributions canincrease this combined limit even more . Employer match You may choose to have a plan available for just youremployees to easily contribute money for their retirement.Or , you can go a step further and offer additionalcontributions where you match all or a part of employeecontributions . The plan does not require an employer match , but its a great way to encourage participation and is apowerful tool in attracting and retaining employees . If youchoose to make matching contributions , they do not counttoward the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan limits on employee contributions . Roth option - You may choose to offer a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- option . Under aRoth option , employee contributions are made on an aftertax basis . However , a distribution from a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSAaccount is completely free of federal income tax if it meetsboth of the following requirements : It is made after the end of the five year period that beginswith the year that the employee made his or her first Roth403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSA contribution to your plan . It is made after the employee reaches age 59 , becomesdisabled or dies . Access to account balances-You can select a time period for employees to become fullyvested in the employer-matching portion of the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan.Note that employee contributions are always 100 % vested.Distributions can be made only when participants severemployment , reach age 59 , become permanently disabledor experience financial hardship , or are a reservist called toactive duty for 180 days or more or for an indefinite period.The employer plan may impose additional restrictions . Unless the distributions are rolled over to an eligibleretirement plan , they will be taxed as ordinary income.Distributions before age 59 may also be subject to an IRS10 % penalty tax . Distributions attributable to employercontributions are only allowed on severance of employmentor occurrence of another event as provided by the plan .
You can borrow from 457 retirement plans . The minimum loan is $ 1,000 and the maximum is set by the IRS . There are also loan interest rate charges to consider . You can generally borrow once a year . The loan is generally set to be repaid no longer than five years . There are cautions when you borrow from any qualified or non-qualified plan like 457s .
A section 457 retirement plan allows the participant to contribute some of their salary on a pre-tax basis . You do n't pay any federal or state income taxes on the amounts you contribute until the funds are withdrawn or you take regular distributions from your account at retirement . It 's generally accepted as a supplement to you main retirement plan .
457 deferred compensation plans that allow pretax contributions . The earnings accumulate tax deferred and allow you a catch up contribution of $ 5,500 you are age 50 or older . 457 -LRB- b -RRB- deferred compensation plans that are available in government and non-government organizations under 501 -LRB- c -RRB- . 2013 contribution limits are $ 17,500 .
There are ways to save your entire income for retirement if you desire . There are tax qualified plans that defer the taxation on a retirement program and they have annual contribution limits . If you are choosing to save for retirement using 401 -LRB- k -RRB- elective deferral , if you are eligible for a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- or a 457 Deferred Compensation plan , you could reduce your taxable income by up to $ 18,000 in 2015 . If you are over age 50 you can increase those limits by $ 6,000 . You can make contributions to a simple IRA and reduce your taxable income by $ 12,500 and add on an additional $ 6,000 if you are over age 50 . You can establish a defined benefit pension plan and reduce your income by $ 210,000 in 2015 . If you use a defined contribution plan you can reduce your taxable income by up to $ 53,000 . There are a variety of other limits depending upon whether you have highly compensated employees or key employees . The other most important limitation is on the ability of a person to participate in a Roth IRA . The maximum income you can have for a single tax payer is $ 131,000 to participate in a Roth IRA . If you are married the maximum income limit is $ 193,000 . Notice I didnt say anything about reducing taxable income . The Roth IRA is funded with after-tax income ; however , qualified withdrawals can be received income tax free .
Under 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Plans allow employees of businesses and sponsoring organizations to defer income taxation on retirement savings into future years . Deferring income over the years prior to retirement can have a significant tax advantaged effect on the savings versus investing in after tax dollars . Many businesses allow for these plans when traditional deductible plans have maxed out .
There are several qualified defined contribution retirement plans , individual and employer sponsored . Here are a few examples of qualified retirement plan contribution : The compensation limits are a complex calculation . IRAs $ 5,500 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- Employee $ 17,500 457 Employee $ 17,500 Catch-up Contribution $ 5,500 Defined Contribution $ 51,000
If your retirement plan is qualified then you have contribution limitations or by the percentage of income or both . There are several defined contribution plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- , SEP IRA , HR10 , IRA , Roth IRA & 457 Plan . Depending upon income and the plan the best is suitable for you , contributions from $ 5,500 for a traditional and Roth IRA all the way up to $ 51,000 for a defined contribution plan .
The are several qualified defined contribution retirement plans available for to consider . Here are some plan contribution limits for 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , most 457 plans and Thrift Savings Plan contributions are $ 17,500 for 2013 . The catch-up contribution limit for employees aged 50 is $ 5,500 . The limit on annual contributions for IRAs is $ 5,500 .
In 2013 the contribution limits for qualified plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , most 457 plans and the federal governments Thrift Savings Plan are $ 17,500 . The catch-up contribution limit for age 50 and older is $ 5,500 per year . The limit on annual contributions to a traditional Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA -RRB- is $ 5,500 .
You should contribute to the maximum allowable in your retirement plan . It 's like paying yourself first . Some individual plans allow $ 5500 to $ 51000 for 2013 . Some employer sponsored plans like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 457 -LRB- b -RRB- permit $ 17500 in annual contributions . Keep in mind that some employers match some portion of your contributions .
The Internal Revenue Code allows certain state and local governments and non-governmental organizations a tax exemption for plans that defer compensation . This exemption is under section 457 . Individuals covered by these plans can chose to defer income to specified limits and thus defer income tax on their contribution and subsequent earnings until the time of retirement .
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Include Fire Insurance ?
Homeowners insurance is Fire Insurance and more . Homeowners Insurance covers a variety of perils . Many will cover any peril that is not specifically excluded in your policy . Most common perils covered are Fire , Hail , Wind , Lightening , Vandalism , and Theft . Your Homeowners Insurance also protects you for Liability if someone is hurt on your property and you are engaged in a Lawsuit .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Home insurance covers fires with most carriers and the type of policy you have . Also it matters on how the fire was started lightning that started the forest on fire by your home or if the neighbor child lit fireworks and it caught the field on fire and your hope . Two different examples of fires one the home should be covered by your insurance the other could be paid by the person that started the other fire . I highly recommend you contact your agent and make sure you are properly covered and also make sure you home is clear of debris and brush to make sure that if a fire is heading your direction that you have a clean perimeter around the home . There are things that you can spray on your home that will prevent it from burning if you know a forest fire is on it 's wayAlso
There are many factors that affect the rates for homeowners insurance : Homeowner -LRB- insured -RRB- - The insured 's age , credit rating , loss experience , prior coveragewill affect the premium charged for a homeowners policy . Home location - Location is a very big deal . For example , a home located on the coast will be subject to a much higher premium compared to the same home located far inland due to the increased possibility of loss from wind or storm damage . Likewise , a home located in an area that has excellent fire protection -LRB- very close proximity to a fire station -RRB- will have a lower premium than the same home located in a secluded location very far away from fire protection . Home Construction - A stick-built wood frame home is more expensive to insure than the same valued home constructed of fire-resistive materials due to the increased potential for catastrophic fire loss with the former . Coverage Limits - Obviously a $ 500,000 home will cost more to insure than a similarly located/constructed $ 200,000 home .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
Protection class is determined by an independent organization called the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . ISO will classify the from PC 1-10 based on the distance to a fire department and fire hydrant among other things . On Long Island , NY most homes are considered protection class 4 meaning they are within 5 miles of a Fire Department and within 1000 ft of a fire hydrant . Some homes in the hamptons are Protection class 9 . This means that they may be within 5 miles of a fire department but they do not have a hydrant within 1000 ft. Many companies will either surcharge the risk or not write it at all . Having said that , if the fire department has trucks that can pump from an existing body of water , at a certain rate per hour , or can hold a certain amount of water they can be eligible for the Protection class 4 rates . Hope this helps !
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
Adequate home insurance coverage is very important , and the discussion should be had with a professional independent agent . The best way to answer this question is to provide some general information for the primary/main coverage types on the home insurance policy -LRB- please note that each state and company policy coverages and requirements vary . This is why it is important to review in detail with your professional independent agent -RRB- . Dwelling value : this is the coverage limit that protects the structure/dwelling . Ideally , this coverage limit needs to be set at the proper replacement cost valuation . In the event of a total loss -LRB- fire , tornado ... -RRB- , what is the amount of insurance coverage on your dwelling that you would need to get you back in that exact same house?The answer to this question is the dwelling amount coverage limit that your home insurance policy should have . Personal property/contents coverage limit : this is the coverage that provides protection for your personal belongings . It is suggested to take pictures of your belongings -LRB- especially your more valuable items -RRB- as well as have copies of the pictures and any receipts to provide proof of ownership in the event of a claim . Again , like with the dwelling value we discussed above , the question here is what is the value of all of your items in your house ? Or , what would thecost be toget everythingwhat you have now in your house if a fire or tornado destroyed it all?The answer to this question is the personal property contents limit that your home insurance policy should have . Also - please note that if you have a mortgage on your home , most often the lender will require the loan amount or 100 % ofthecalculated structurereplacement value to be the required dwelling coverage amount.This amount can vary , and to ensure that you are getting the coverage protection you need without overinsuring , please review with your local professional independent agent . Liability coverage/medical pay to others : this is about the least-expensive part of a home insurance policy , but it is very important to have . The minimal amount of liability coverage suggested to have for this coverage category is $ 300,000 , although usually the bump up in coverage to the $ 500,000 liability limit is usually very small . And , the medical payments to others coverage should be at $ 5000 . These coverages protect you from injury that an unrelated -LRB- visitor -RRB- sustains while on your property , or that you are deemed to be liabile -LRB- responsible -RRB- for . Please note that these are just a couple of the important insurance coverages that are included on your home insurance . There are many other coverages that might be included with the policy that you choose or there might be other suggested coverages that you can add to your home policy that gives you the extra coverage protection that you need . There is not a general coverage limit or value that is used for determining the proper coverages for your home insurance . Every client is different and so are their needs . Make sure that you review what your needs and coverage requirements are , and let an independent agent create a policy specifically for you and your needs .
To obtain an Estimate of Home Insurance , you would need to answer a few questions relative to the risk.The basic characteristics of the home to be insured including the Year Built , Square Footage , Type of Roof and the Use of the Home -LRB- Owner Occupied or Tenant Occupied -RRB- will help assess the correct reconstruction value of the home . In addition , you will need to list any safety features such as Deadbolts , Smoke Detectors , Fire Extinguishers , Central Station Alarm Monitoring & Fire Sprinklers ; these items will most likely either be necessary for qualification or offer a security discount depending on the program . For a simple self service homeowners insurance quotation , there is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
The Declaration page of a Homeowners ' Policy is the page that outlines the coverage that is particular to your home . The Declaration -LRB- Dec -RRB- page includes the policy number and the date your policy began . It lists you as the policyholder and both your mailing and location address . It goes on to state the current property amounts including your Dwelling , Other Structures and Personal Property as well as any `` inside limits '' that may be stated for particular categories of personal property such as jewelry , fine arts , fire arms etc. . The policy Dec will state your policy deductible for property coverage and the settlement option -LRB- usually Replacement Guarantee -RRB- . Next it will state the amount of Liability coverage you have as well as any Medical Payment protection . The Dec will also show the property rating territory , proximity to a fire hydrant and fire protection class . Finally , the premium will be listed .
When you establish a Home Insurance policy , some of the coverage is automatically included , and some of the coverage is optional . Let 's take a look at the included coverage first . Coverage A - Dwelling : This is the primary coverage for the policy and dictates the amount of some of the other included coverage limits . This is the amount that the insurance company will pay up to in the case of any claims . From a simple window breakage due to storm damage , or a total loss due to fire , the maximum the policy will pay during any one policy period -LRB- typically a year -RRB- would be the amount shown on this coverage Coverage B - Other Structures : This coverage is for fences , detached garages , unattached decks or gazebos and etc. . The limit on this coverage is typically a percentage of Coverage A , for example 10 % of the amount of your dwelling limits . This coverage is in addition to Coverage A , meaning if a loss damaged more than just the dwelling , you can collect on both . Coverage C - Personal Property : This is the limit the policy will pay to replace your belongings , furniture , clothing , and etc. . Typically this is 50 % of Coverage A , and again this is in addition to Coverage A. Coverage D - Loss of Use : If there was a claim initiated on your property , and you had to find temporary residence while repairs were being made , or the home was simply no longer livable , this would be the coverage that would apply . Typically this is 30 % of Coverage A and would be in addition as well . On top of these coverage limits , you can have additional coverage through either automatically included or optional extensions of coverage . These can include , but are not limited to : Debris Removal ; Cyber Theft Protection ; Credit Card and Forgery ; Trees , Shrubs and Plants ; Fire Department Service Charge ; Ordinance or Law ; Glass Breakage ; and additional riders to increase personal property coverage above limits . For example , the policy might restrict replacement of Money/Gold/Coins to only $ 200 per claim . Or Jewelry , Furs , Precious Stones to $ 1000 per item / $ 5000 per claim . These riders would increase coverage for those specific items you might have that are of greater value . Finally , there is coverage for Personal Liability , which is included in most policies , but is not calculated as a percentage of Coverage A. Typically the limits provided for this coverage start at $ 100,000 and can be as high as $ 1,000,000 or more in some States . This coverage would apply if you were ever personally sued for any activity other than a vehicle accident , as your auto policy would cover that . I know that 's a lot to think about . I highly recommend you meet with a licensed insurance agent in your area to have them walk you through all of the options available and help select the right amount of insurance for your individual needs .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Renters Insurance Who Does It Cover ?
Great question ! Typically a policy , whether it is a renters , health or life insurance policy will only cover the person or persons named on the policy . So if you put you and your spouse , you both are covered . If you name your family , then you all are covered . If it is just you , and you have a roommate who is not named , you are covered , they are most likely not . Check your policy and see who is listed , and who they will cover , or call your agent and have them tell you . Thanks for asking !
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
Renters Insurance will cover your personal property up to the limits of your policy . For example if you have $ 50,000 in personal property coverage in the policy and all your clothes and furniture were destroyed in the fire then you would be able to claim that as a loss . Renters Insurance only covers your personal property and does not cover the structure . It will also cover for losses for theft . Lets say you had your lap top from home in your car and someone broke in your car and stole the computer then you could file that as a claim on your renters insurance policy . Some renters insurance also covers for Loss of Use and Personal Property off premises . This may not be available from ever insurance carrier .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
Renters insurance is a must have for everyone who rents a home or apartment and it 's very inexpensive . Renters insurance typically cost between $ 100 - $ 200 per year depending on how much personal property coverage you need . Renters insurance will cover your belongings and provide liability coverage . Renters insurance even covers personal property away from your home or apartment . For example , someone breaks into your car and steels your iPad . Most policies limit coverage away from your residence premise to 10 % but the example would be a covered loss .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does A Non-Working Spouse Need Life Insurance ?
Yes , if there were a financial hardship if they died . Let 's say the wife has a very demanding and high income career . The husband stays home to raise the kids and take care of the house . The husband suddenly dies . Now the wife has to hire a nanny , a house keeper and possibly a personal assistant to replace the work that was being done .
The maximum amount of coverage carriers generally approve for a stay-at-home spouse -LRB- or even if they 're just temporarily unemployed -RRB- is going to be up to the face amount the working spouse has in place , regardless of whether it 's term or permanent coverage . A good way to figure out how much coverage is appropriate for a non-working spouse is what expenses would be incurred you need is what expenses would be incurred if the stay-at-home spouse passed away . This can be a wide range of things including the cost of daycare -LRB- if you have kids -RRB- , what it would cost to hire someone to do the services the stay-at-home spouse did during the day , funeral expenses , etc. . From there , you 'll want to look at how long do you need that coverage for ? Til the kids are out of the house ? til the house is paid off ? til you 're retired ? longer ? Perhaps you need a higher amount of coverage now and less coverage later . Many people often have a hard time finding the right balance point of amount of coverage and length of coverage . This is where working with an independent insurance agent can come in handy in helping you determine what insurance policy structure will be most suitable to cover the needs at hand . Send me a message if I can be of help .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The death of a spouse is perhaps the most emotionally traumatic event which humans experience . What would you do if your spouse died unexpectedly ? In over 55 % of married-couple families today , both marriage partners work outside the home at least part time . -LRB- 1 -RRB- Often the financial requirements to run the household substantially exceed the income of either spouse alone . If an untimely death were to occur , the inability to meet financial obligations with the single remaining spouses income might require the hasty sale of assets or , even worse , a bank foreclosure on the family residence . Life insurance is an excellent means of providing money when it is needed in these traumatic moments . Some families are fortunate enough to allow either the mother or father to stay home with small children while the other earns sufficient cash to meet household and living expenses . It is obvious that the loss of a breadwinner would create a financial calamity . Couples should consider the potential cost of replacing the services of the spouse who stays at home to care for the children . Without the deceased spouse , a surviving spouse working outside the home would face new expenditures for child care , either in the home or at a babysitter or day care center as well as someone to take the children to the doctor , dentist , piano lessons , etc. . Perhaps the surviving parent could take time off work to fulfill these obligations , but this time off work would also amount to a financial loss . Most families can help effectively remove this potential financial emergency by acquiring a life insurance policy on each spouse . Source : Statistical Abstract of the United States : 2012 , Table 700 Married-Couple Families ; data from 2009 . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
If you are 65 or older , you can get Medicare Part A if you have n't worked , as long as your spouse or divorced spouse has worked enough hours to receive Medicare , and if your spouse or divorced spouse is at least age 62 . Also , you can get Medicare if you get Social Security . Getting Social Security benefits only requires a 10 year work history for you or a spouse , or less if the employed spouse dies at a very young age . There are some other caveats dealing with SSDI , railroad , kidney failure and more . See WEBSITELINK for more details .
The Insured person and policy Owner are required to sign the life insurance application , so if one spouse is taking out a policy on the other , both need to sign . If a married person takes out a policy for which he/she is both Owner and Insured , the spouse does not have to sign the application . If the spouse is POA , Guardian , or other legal representative for the Insured person , the spouse may need to sign for the Insured . Another situation in which a spouse might need to sign is if the Owner or Beneficiary of the policy is a trust for which the spouse is a Trustee .
Many factors come into play . If your spouse is a working spouse , she should consider enough life insurance to cover her outstanding debts and a multiple of her income to replace lost earnings on her death . If she is a non-working spouse it is a bit more complicated . Estimate the cost of replacing her services as a homemaker and mother and factor that in .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
Getting married may or may not have an effect on your insurance policy depending upon what actions you take . Technically adding your new spouse to your policy will not change your benefits but it may have an impact on your monthly costs . If you are covered under an individual major medical policy then you would see your monthly premium increased by the amount associated with your spouse 's age for the policy you have in force -LRB- this assumes you are covered under an Affordable Care Act compliant policy taken out on or after January 1 , 2014 when community rating went into effect -RRB- . If you are adding a spouse to an employer based policy then the financial impact will depend upon what your employer 's contribution is towards employees with dependents . Some employers contribute towards the health insurance premium costs of their employees and their covered dependents . Increasingly though , employers are contributing only towards the cost of the employee 's coverage and the employee is totally financially responsible for the difference in cost for adding a dependent to their coverage . To make things even more interesting , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- does not define spouses as dependents ! So , while the practice has not become wide spread yet , some employers are not allowing spousal coverage under their group plans -LRB- dependent children must be covered according to the ACA -RRB- . What is more common is that if your spouse is employed and their employer offers health insurance and yet you still wanted to add your spouse to your coverage , the employer could assess a penalty charge above and beyond the additional premium cost for adding a spouse in this situation . Obviously the objective here is to discourage the addition of spouses whose cost and risk could be borne by another employer . So , adding a new spouse to your health insurance coverage may not be the simple transaction that it may have been in the past . You need to explore your options and determine what the financial implications are for adding a spouse to your coverage . In some situations you may find that it makes more sense financially to purchase individual health insurance coverage for your spouse than to add them onto your group 's health insurance plan . I would recommend you find a health insurance broker to assist you with this decision making process .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
A little more context would have helped here . I will presume you are asking about staying on your husband 's group health insurance . Here you can get a definitive Yes and No . It really is now a matter of the husband 's employer 's personnel policies . As a general rule in 2o14 , employers who are offering group health insurance to their employees also make that coverage available to the employee 's dependents , including spouses . One of the oddities of the Affordable Care Act is that it does not define spouses as being eligible dependents . So , technically , as long as they offer coverage to dependent children , an employer could actually exclude spouses from coverage under the terms of its group health plan and be within the letter of the law . Very few employers have taken things to the extreme of completely dropping spouses from eligibility . You do , however , see a growing move to either require working spouses who have coverage available from their job to enroll in their employer 's coverage or even more commonly , such spouses are assessed a higher premium from their spouse 's health plan if they could be covered elsewhere and waive that coverage . This is an area where employer policies are evolving rapidly so it will be wise to stay up to date on these matters with your husband 's coverage .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Yes as long as the insured who is still working and getting coverage from his/her job does not put in a request to make any changes . The insurance company would not know about the spouse becoming an ex unless someone files paperwork to say that . Sometimes the working spouse will allow the other spouse to stay on the policy because -LRB- 1 -RRB- the court requires it or -LRB- 2 -RRB- that spouse still has the children living with them and it makes more sense for the family to keep their insurance intact .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
There are a couple life insurance policies that `` cover '' both spouses . One is called a `` First to die '' policy where both spouses are insured until one of them dies . Then the surviving spouse becomes the beneficiary and the policy is terminate . IN a `` Last to die '' policy again both spouses are insured and the policy does not pay a benefit until the last of the two spouses die . Then typically the beneficiary is the estate and the policy is designed to pay the estate tax . Or the beneficiaries could be the children or anyone else . But those are the types of policies that cover both spouses in one policy .
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
Yes , your estate does include life insurance . While you are alive , it just includes the cash value available in your policy or policies . After death , the life insurance proceeds paid out to beneficiaries are included in the value of the estate . If a spouse is alive , there will not be any estate tax consequences . It is when the surviving spouse dies that the life insurance proceeds on that spouse can a taxable event -LRB- or if the first spouse to die left insurance money to the second to die , and those proceeds had not been spent or distributed when the second spouse died -RRB- .
An affidavit of spousal health insurance is a legal document that may be required by an employer or governmental health plan -LRB- such as a state 's Children 's Health Insurance Plan or CHIP -RRB- that documents if the employee or applicant 's spouse is employed and if they are eligible for or covered by their employer 's group health insurance plan . This form will be used to determine if the spouse is eligible for enrollment or determine that their employer 's plan will pay in a primary capacity -LRB- pays the claim first -RRB- and the other employer 's plan or the government based health plan will pay in a secondary capacity -LRB- paying on any unpaid balance after the primary insurance carrier has paid on a claim -RRB- . Expect to see these types of forms in your workplace or if you or a family member are accessing public health insurance programs . Increasing numbers of employers , both private sector and public sector , are making efforts to move dependent spouses who have access to health insurance elsewhere off of their plans and onto the spouse 's employer 's plan . Increasingly an additional premium penalty is being applied to employees who insist on covering a spouse who has coverage available through another employer or source . And , in the more extreme circumstances some employers are declining to cover spouses at all . These actions are a result of the increasing costs of health care that employers and governmental agencies are experiencing and to a quirk in the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- that does not define a spouse as a dependent . Unfortunately , this is what happens when politician 's pass a law without reading it as was the case with the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To End Life Insurance Policy ?
That is a great question ! The most common methodis you pass away . If that is n't your first choice , then You have a couple of options . -LRB- and I 'd strongly recommend that you speak with your agent or advisor first , especially if it is just a matter of unaffordable payments -RRB- The first is to write them , and tell them that you would like to surrender the policy . -LRB- contact me , and I 'll explain surrender vs. cancel -RRB- the second is to stop paying it . Both methods will end the policy . If you need help , please contact me . Thanks for asking !
The easiest way is to notify the company or your agent . When you just stop paying premiums some confusion can be involved . It is your policy , and it is your life . While I hate to see anyone stop protecting those that they love , the decision is entirely yours .
With term , the answer is easy . Just stop paying for it and it will lapse . With permanent , you have choices . Some folks would notify the carrier they want to end it and `` cash out '' . But remember that money then is taxable . Why would you want to do that ? You can borrow against that policy , and the loan is tax free and never needs to be repaid , unless you lapse the policy . If you must stop paying , how about letting it just pay itself out from the growth of your policy with no premiums due ? Think about your options ! Talk with your agent . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Before you end you life insurance policy you should contact your life insurance broker to see if there are any alternatives available such as a policy change . If the policy has a cash value , there maybe tax consequences should you surrender the policy . You want to make an informed decision . In order to end your life insurance policy , you need to advise the insurance company in writing . Some companies require surrender forms . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Term life insurance may end at the end of the term , or it may go up in price at the end of the term . The end of the term is the period when the guaranteed premium ends . E.g. . If you buy a ten year term policy , the policy will end or the premium will go up at the start of year 11 . Because the premiums go up so high , most people do end their term policies when the term ends . However , if there is a provision for the premium to go up -LRB- called annually renewable -RRB- , it can go up to whatever age the policy dictates . Some are annually renewable as high as age 90 . Another option offered for many term policies is to convert the policy to permanent insurance . This must be done before the term ends . Again , the price per thousand dollars of coverage is much higher for the new policy than it was for the term policy . However , it is a good option if you can not qualify for new insurance , and you may be able to take a smaller face amount to keep the premium affordable .
The age that Life Insurance ends is dependent on the age that the person was when they took it out , and the type of policy they took out . For Term Life Insurance , the policy ends -LRB- or goes up in price to what is usually an unaffordable cost -RRB- at the end of the term . Therefore , someone who is 55 years old and takes out a 10 year Term policy will have to find a new policy at age 65 . For Whole Life Insurance , the policy ends when death occurs or when the policy matures -LRB- typically at age 100 -RRB- . At either time , the full amount of the death benefit is paid -LRB- when the policy matures , you are actually receiving the cash value , which becomes equal to the death benefit , called `` endowment '' -RRB- . If you quit paying premiums on the policy , or borrow without paying it back , the policy could end sooner without any benefit being paid . This is true for any type of Life Insurance policy . Some Whole Life policies are paid for with a single premium ; as long as you do n't borrow from them , those will be in effect upon death or maturity without paying any more premiums , as will any policy that is `` paid up '' at a certain point . Universal Life operates much like Whole Life , except you can pick an age at which your guaranteed coverage will end .
It is going to depend on the type of policy purchased . For term insurance there is a stated policy end . Usually with newer term policies the end is age 90 or 95 . With older policies as young as 70 could be the end . AARP 's term life ends at age 80 for example . With universal life policies have age limits of up to age 121 in some cases . There are some Guaranteed Universal LIfe policies that offer lifetime coverage . These are fairly new policies , that just require a set premium be paid for the life of the policy . Whole life depending on the age of the policy will `` endow '' at age 100 or later . At that point the cash value will be greater than the death benefit and the insured gets the cash values . The big thing to remember is that policy end dates are always changing when new insurance plans are created . The big thing is check your policy . An end date will be stated in the body of the policy . This is a multiple answer question , you have to look .
Term life insurance is life insurance that covers you for a `` term '' , or temporary period of time . The most common terms are 10 , 15 , 20 , or 30 years . The premium will usually stay the same during the term , then jump up to a very high price at the end of the term . After that , it will continue to go up every year . Some policies simply end when the term ends . Term policies have no cash value . You will not receive any money back -LRB- unless you took ROP term , in which case it would return the premiums you paid in , at the end of the term -RRB- . People buy Term insurance for it 's relatively low price . If you can afford to pay the premiums for Whole Life or Universal Life , you might end up paying less overall , because your premiums can end at some point but your policy can stay in effect . With Term , when you quit paying premiums , your coverage ends . If you have a temporary need , Term can be a great choice .
Term Life means life insurance that will end after a certain term , or number of years . E.g. 20 year Term will end after 20 years . It is assumed that the price will stay the same for the entire term , but not every policy 's price is guaranteed to stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for the entire term . So look at that feature when you pick out your Term policy . Also , Term life does not usually just end when the term ends ; it usually jumps way up in price and then can go up every year after that . If you need to keep the policy for a short time after the term ends , it is possible , but not economically feasible for most people to keep up for very long . When the term ends , most people buy a new policy , if they are able to qualify for one at that time .
When term life insurance ends , the premium rises drastically or the policy simply ends . When the premium rises at the end of the term , it is no longer locked in and can raise annually . Rather than wait for the term to end and the premium to jump up , you might want to look into converting your policy to permanent life insurance . Whether you convert your policy to permanent before the term ends , or pay the new annually renewable premium at the end of the term , your premium will be substantially higher . But by converting you can lock in your premium for a longer period of time .
Term Life Insurance Ends when the contract period is over . Term life Insurance ends when you havent paid your premium and the reinstatement period is over . Term life insurance ends when a death claim occurs while the policy is in force . Term life insurance ends and permanent life insurance begins when the conversion privilege is exercised on the existing term life insurance policy .
Term life insurance is life insurance that will end after a certain length of time . Some Term Life Insurance policies will automatically renew at the end of the term at a much higher price than before , and can then go up in price every year . With other Term policies , you must elect to pay the new , higher premium when the level period ends . Either way , the time of level premium ends at the end of the term .
What do you need to know about term life insurance ? You need to know that : 1 -RRB- Unless you have some type of rider stating otherwise , term life insurance will jump way up in price at the end of the term , and go up in price annually after that . Or it will end at the end of the term . 2 -RRB- Most term life insurance will stay the same premium during the entire term , and the death benefit will stay the same for the entire term . But you need to ask your agent to make sure you are buying a guaranteed level premium , and a guaranteed level death benefit , to be sure . 3 -RRB- There is no cash value in term life insurance . Only ROP -LRB- return of premium -RRB- term will pay back a substantial cash value if you keep it enough years , and are alive at the end of the term . 4 -RRB- If you miss a payment more than two months , your term policy will end . There is no cash value in it to pay the premium , so it is very important to keep up your payments with term life insurance . 5 -RRB- Many term policies are convertible to permanent insurance for at least part of the term period . If you convert your term policy , you must convert it to the policy or policies stipulated by the life insurance company at that point in time . These policies may or may not have lifetime guarantees , but will be UL or WL . The rate will be based on your age at the time of conversion . There are no health requirements ; your permanent policy will be rated similarly to what your term policy was rated .
Term insurance will expire at some point in time as term policies are closed contracts which have a beginning and an end . With newer term policies the end comes between the ages of 90 to 95 . Many of the older term policies written end between the ages of 70 and 80 . If you have an older term policy , check to see when the policy ends and if there is a conversion option if you need coverage longer than you previously thought you would . As Jerry mentioned most term policies written currently have level premium periods of 5-30 years , but still have a life after in most cases . The cost after the level period expires will be much higher and increase every year after until the policy ends .
All policies end when death occurs . If the policy is in force at the time of death , the policy will pay the face amount at that time . When you purchase Term Life Insurance , you decide at that time when you want your coverage to end . It corresponds with the number of years in your Term policy . As a rule , the older you are when the policy ends , the higher the premium will be . But you also have to consider that , if you want to purchase a new policy after this one ends , the price on the new policy will be much higher , or you may not be able to qualify for the amount of coverage that you want at that time . So locking in the premium for a long period of time while you are healthy is a good idea , if you need the coverage for a long period of time . Permanent life insurance ends when the policy matures , at which time you can take the face amount in cash . But most people choose to keep the policy in effect beyond that , until death .
That is a great question ! Unlike a whole life policy , which ends when you do , term policies almost always end before you do . It 's why they are so cheaply offered , statistically , the companies rarely have to pay out , compared to whole life policies . So when they do end , you have really only three choices : walk away as if there never was a policy , -LRB- since there is nothing contractually obligating either of you anymore , in the typical policy case -RRB- , hope that the policy has a conversion clause -LRB- one that allows your paid premiums to be converted to a paid up whole life policy with a greatly reduced face value -RRB- , or you renew the policy . If you choose the latter , be prepared for the policy to renew in one year terms , and for the price to go up exponentially each time . They get very expensive very quickly . This can be a real problem if it happens when age or health issues prevent you from finding another company that will write you . This is often the case with the term policies that companies like AARP and AAA offer , policies that end when you turn 80 . With life expectancy now averaging years longer than 80 , and the increasing costs as you age , more and more Elder citizens find themselves out a lot of money , and with no protection . Please be careful when you are looking at these kinds of policies , okay ? Thanks for asking !
The other respondents explain that two basic triggers exist within common liability coverage policies . It is important to realize that most personal insurance - auto , home , motorcycle , rv - are based upon the occurrence trigger in the insurance policy . An occurrence is an event including repeated exposures to the same condition , that cause loss covered by the policy . You 'll understand that if the loss `` occurs '' during the policy period , the loss is coverable and a duty to defend exists until such time as it is determined after further investigation that coverage is not provided by the policy . At that time the carrier would probably extend a `` reservation of rights '' letter to you to notify you that the investigation of the loss events are revealing to the carrier that the loss is not covered for some reason contained within the policy or due to the events that occurred . Nevertheless , if the loss `` occurs '' during the period the policy was effective , and barring exclusions and limitations , their is coverage in an occurrence policy . A `` claims made '' policy changes what triggers the benefits of the policy . In the case of claims made coverage , generally only written on business and professional liability exposures , the trigger is the event and when it occurred . What is different now is that the claims must be first made during the period of coverage or a subsequent policy . If a claim is permitted to be made on subsequent policies , the chain of coverage needs to be uninterrupted and the `` retroactive '' date for coverage to be set to a point before the actual date of the loss . Claims Made policies were designed to help eliminate the chance that years and years of coverage on an occurrence policy could not be stacked one upon the other to generate large amounts of coverage . In the case of claims made policies , only the current policy limit is exposed to loss and not a stack of limits from policies covering prior annual periods . One other point that is necessary to understand . Generally , there are limitations on how long after a policy is cancelled for a claim to be presented . Occurrence policies are much more accommodating here . On the other hand , claims made policies have a limited period of time after the policy ends for a claim to be made . This is referred to as extended discovery and extended discovery on otherwise unendorsed policies is only 60 days . That is , you only have sixty days to present a claim for coverage at the end of a claims made policy . Additional extended periods of discovery are available at additional cost but each carrier may have different periods of discovery available . This feature on a claims made policy provides the `` tail '' of coverage that an occurrence policy includes without additional charge . A `` tail '' is the time beyond the period of coverage where a claim may be first reported or appear on the books of the carrier . Liability type losses can have a long `` tail '' due to the nature of the coverage and potential loss . Property losses , on the other hand , generally have short `` tails '' where the loss is not known . The reserve that the carrier must maintain within its accounting for these losses is not as the IBNR -LRB- incurred but not reported -RRB- loss reserve . Over time the carrier reduces this reserve in recognition that the further past the end of a policy that they travel , the less likely a loss has occurred or will be reported . This should help you understand just how much must taken into account to answer your generalized question . I hope this helps answer your question .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of reasons why a whole life policy makes sense . One would be if it is purchased for a young child . The price is locked in at that low rate for their entire life , and many companies will offer the opportunity to increase that coverage without any questions . The second is that the policy does n't end , so there is no way that you can outlive it . Many senior citizens purchase the policy advertised on TV by the large senior citizen advocate company , only to find that it ends when they turn 80 . Given that the average life expectancy is 84 for women and 82 for men , for many that is a terrible surprise to find that the policy ends , and that getting another one is too expensive , or not available due to their health issues . The third is that no matter how badly your health declines , you have insurance that ca n't drop you , or raise your rates . When your term policy ends , and youwant to get another one , your age and health issues are re-evaluated when determining eligibility and price . Please feel free to contact me if you would like to discuss this further . Thanks for asking !
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A good time to end Term Life Insurance is right before it enters the annually renewable premium at the end of the term . The premium goes up very high then and will continue to go up each year . If the coverage is still needed and health makes it prohibitive or impossible to get a new policy , it is better to convert the Term policy to Whole or Universal Life at that time . If you wait until the Term expires , the * conversion privilege is lost , so it is important to address this before the term ends . * Some Term policies do not offer the opportunity to convert , and for some , the ability to convert them to permanent ends after a set number of years rather than to the end of the term .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can A Learner Driver Get Car Insurance ?
That is a great question ! In most cases , the learner is added to someone else 's policy as a driver until such time as they can get their own policy . Parents add their child as a driver on the vehicle , as it is generally cheaper than the policy for a teenager would be . Thanks for asking !
Here in CT , one must be at least 16 years of age in order to obtain a drivers license . A 15 year old has the opportunity to obtain a learners ' permit within the regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles , but does not have to be listed as a driver on the parent 's policy . Other states may be different . Once a young driver receives his or her license , then they need to be listed on their parent 's auto policy as a regular driver in their home with access to their vehicles . If the 16 year old purchases a car of their own and wishes to register in in their own name , then they will need to obtain their own separate auto policy in order to accomplish that . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your state and the best options available for both you and your young driver .
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
You need to notify your insurance company as soon as your teenager has a drivers license . Most insurers dont need to know if the dependent has a learners permit . Usually this involves a telephone call to the company or their agent . You can expect that the inexperienced driver will be assigned to one of the cars and that will impact the premium for that car .
Yes , you can get car insurance with a learner 's permit or a school and work permit . The public interest is served by having all driver 's have auto insurance , so state insurance commissions do n't look too favorably on insurance companies if they refuse to insure permitted drivers . If you are under 18 you will likely need a parent on the policy with you as you are too young to sign a contract , but that is the only issue I have ever seen with a permit . Let me know if you have more questions .
Probably not as an insurance company will need your drivers license number in order to issue a policy . If you have your learners permit and are living with your parents , then more than likely their auto insurance policy will cover you while you are driving one of their cars . Once you earn your license , you can either stay on their policy or if you decide to make that purchase and register the car in your name , then you would get your own policy . Remember , start by talking to their Insurance Professional and asking about insuring your car with the same company . You could be enjoying some great money saving discounts when you do .
Only licensed drivers are listed on auto policies in California . Those driving a vehicle with a learners permit are not included . You should notify your agent as soon as your inexperienced driver is licensed . In California the driver will be considered inexperienced for several years in two steps .
Actually , at least here in Connecticut , only licensed drivers need to be added to your policy . Your daughter just has her learners ' permit so as such is not yet a licensed driver . I happen to represent Nationwide and our auto policy automatically covers our clients and their children as they are learning to drive the family car -LRB- s -RRB- . I think that perhaps your agent just needs to check the terms and conditions of your particular policy . You did the right thing by being proactive and advising your agent that she is learning to drive .
That is a great question ! In most cases , the learner is added to someone else 's policy as a driver until such time as they can get their own policy . Parents add their child as a driver on the vehicle , as it is generally cheaper than the policy for a teenager would be . Thanks for asking !
The policy requires that all the drivers in the household be identified . In California you do not have to identify someone who has a learners permit . Once the person gets a license the insurer must be notified . Agents will frequently start tracking children after their 14th birthday to make sure that drivers license information is gathered in a timely manner .
Each carrier is different but I have found that the most common practice is that a driver with a learner 's permit is not added to an auto policy until they are actually licensed . Coverage under a relative 's policy would extend to the driver with a permit in the event of a claim .
Most major auto insurance companies will insure you with a learner 's permit ... assuming that you are a listed driver on your parent 's -LRB- for example -RRB- policy . Typically , you are not charged a premium during the pre-licensing stage but you will be rated on the policy once you obtain your full driving privileges .
There are insurance providers that will offer insurance coverage while carrying a learners permit but they are limited . My advice is to contact a local independent agent who has a much broader access to various insurance providers . This way the agent can shop around and find you policy that will meet your needs .
If you have a learners permit you are more than likely driving only with a blood relative or legal guardian that you currently reside with . If that is the case then you should be covered by the existing auto insurance policy that they have in place when you are driving their vehicle with them .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
Each car in the household is rated on a specific driver . The impact of an inexperienced driver is placed on one car in the household . If the inexperienced driver is the third driver in a two car household the new driver will be assigned as occasional to one of the vehicles . The impact is more significant if the vehicle is new and insured for liability , comprehensive and collision . Some people buy an additional older car so that the inexperienced driver will be assigned to that car . I do not understand the logic in adding two older cars .
Any licensed driver that resides in your household must be included on the auto insurance policies written on cars belonging to your household . There isnt an option . A licensed driver can not sit on a shelf and not be rated on an existing automobile . If the insurance company can determine which vehicle the inexperienced operator drives , they will rate the youthful driver as the primary driver unless there are more drivers than vehicles . Even then the youthful driver will be listed as an occasional operator on one of the vehicles . It is best to consult with your agent to determine the best car for the inexperienced driver to operate . The charge for a youthful driver is generally a percentage of the normal premium , so assigning the youthful driver to a car with a low premium generally makes the best sense .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
Auto insurance follows the car , not the driver . If you loan your car to a licensed operator the insurance on your car continues to cover the car . If the person becomes a member of your household contact your agent and have that person included in the list of drivers in the household . If the driving record of the added driver is unsatisfactory , you will be offered exclusion for that driver and then that driver will not be covered .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is The Average Cost For Renters Insurance ?
That is going to depend on many factors . Some of these factors are geography , age of the building , construction of the building , number of untis , alarm and fire systems within the complex and many others . During my time of handling this type of insurance in my opion I would say that the average is around seven to twenty dollars per thousand dollars of coverage for your personal property .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
Renters insurance the first step you need to do is look at all your belonging tv clothes and personal items and look at what the replacement value is what it would cost if you lost everything and had to buy it all over again . Many do not realize of how much it would cost to replace most of our things since we have gather all that stuff over the years . Granted you ca n't put a price or a value on something such as photographs and things that your child made you but your other things can be quite costly to replace . The average renters contents to replace is30 to 40 thousand if you have to replace everything . As far as the cost of a policy goes the average 100 to 140 a year . Depending on your Liability limits . and if it is a full replacement cost for the coverage of your contents
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
The cost of life insurance increases with age . Obviously , the older we get the more likely we are to die , resulting in the life insurance company paying out a claim . In the words of George Lopez , `` Each Birthday is just another year closer to death '' or `` Studies have shown that the more birthdays you have the longer you live '' . The life insurance industry has amassed a large amount of data at what age people die and the cause of death . With a large enough population , they can predict accurately the average age of a man & woman at death , which helps them derive the cost of insurance based on the age of the insured . For example , in a 20-yr level term , they simply average out the cost of insurance for that 20 year span . For a permanent policy , they simply average the cost until the average age of death . So , all life insurance costs increase as we grow older . That is the reason why the premiums for insurance are much cheaper when we are younger . One last consideration ... because the cost of insurance increases , if you purchased a permanent -LRB- eg universal life , variable universal , etc -RRB- and paid only minimum premiums to keep the policy going , you may receive notification that you need to pay a large sum in premium to keep the insurance in force . This occurs when a policy is underfunded or in other words , the policy owner did not pay enough premiums in to the policy over time and it can not sustain the cost to pay out the death benefit .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
Unlike what you see on television , insurance doesnt come in packages on the shelves of a store . Each renter is individually underwritten to meet the specific requirements of that renter . The average renter in my agency pays around $ 10 month for renters insurance . The company reports a slightly higher figure but neither figure bears any resemblance to what your premium might be .
In 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level plan -LRB- approximately 70 % coverage level and the most common plan design purchased -RRB- was $ 328 per month . This cost , in the overwhelming number of cases , will increase for 2015 plan year rates . As this is a national average figure and health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state , between regions within a state , and between different insurance carriers , it is only the roughest approximation of what health insurance might cost you . Your age and tobacco use status , plus the health insurance plan and insurance carrier you select are the primary factors in determining what your specific individual health insurance rates will be . Finally , whether or not you fall within the income ranges where you would qualify for some degree of an advanced premium tax subsidy will also factor into what your final monthly cost for individual health insurance would be .
The cost for renters insurance will be based in large part on the amount of coverage you desire . On average with 25,000 in personal property protection , 100,000 personal liability , 1000 guest medical and 12 months loss of use your looking at an average of 175-225 annual depending on the insurance company . It 's best in most cases to combine this coverage with your current auto insurance carrier for the maximum discounts on your renters policy and in most cases you will also receive an additional discount on your auto insurance . Discuss your needs with your local agent as there are sub limits you will need to be aware of in a renters policy .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
Renters insurance is about the same rate with all carriers . The average renters policy in Montana is bout $ 100 a year with $ 30,000 worth of contents and $ 100,000 in Liability limits with $ 5,000 in medical pay and a $ 500.00 deductible . Most carriers are between $ 10 to $ 15 a month . The only advantage in choosing some carriers is that if you already have an auto policy with the same carrier then it can lower your auto insurance . Example I have a client that has a carrier in our agency for her auto but they carrier does n't let agents sell the renters policy you can only get it online . But what she did was get the renters policy online for $ 100 a year but it lowered her car insurance $ 80 every 6 months hence it was almost like getting paid to have the renters insurance . I would talk to your local agent and see if they have any package deals since renters policies are so inexpensive but well worth the investment .
Because it 's not going to happen to them and it 's expensive . But the truth is the cost of the coverage is not nearly as expensive as the average cost of care and there is a pretty darned good chance they WILL need care . Roughly 70 % of people over 65 will need long term care services in their lifetime , 40 % of people currently receiving long term care services are aged 10-64 ! Average home health care expenses in Illinois average over $ 45,000 while a semi-private room averages around $ 70,000 , FAR more than the cost of the coverage to pay for it .
NO they can not force you to have renters insurance but they can choose to not rent to you if you do not get renters insurance . Most renters policies are on average $ 100 a year depending on your state that is with 40K worth of coverage on your contents and 100K in liability coverage . It is well worth the cost and in many cases if you bundle it with your auto insurance it lowers your auto insurance I have seen in many cases it lowered your auto insurance 10 a month and the renters insurance is less then 10 a month so this puts you ahead . Contact a local independent agent and they can help you muddle through what works best for you
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
As of July 2013 the average car insurance policy in the United States cost $ 964 per year . In Wisconsin the average policy cost $ 770 . So yes , on average , auto insurance appears to b cheaper in Wisconsin . Keep in mind that these are averages and your individual circumstances may result in higher or lower rates in Wisconsin .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
The average cost of life insurance in Oregon depends on many factors . One big factor is age . A $ 250,000 twenty year Term policy for a 30 year old male at the best health class averages about $ 200 per year . At age 50 , the average rate for that same policy is approximately $ 600 per year IF he still has excellent health . The length of the term is also a big factor . Shorter terms cost less , but as can be seen in the example above . locking in the premium for as long as possible is often a good idea . That is partly because health also greatly affects life insurance rates , and health is more apt to slip away as people age . To find the average life insurance cost in the state of Oregon for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes and test out some different face amounts and term lengths . Then give that agency a call so that you can be sure all your health details are taken into consideration . That will help you get a fair price .
What is the average cost of health insurance ? Well , it 's going to depend on plan features , the age of the insured and the cost of care in their area . There really is n't a true average cost of health insurance as it just depends on who , what and where you are .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do You Shop For Life Insurance Online ?
That 's a great question ! You google `` local independent insurance agents '' . Then work your way down the list until you find one you like . I am not a fan of trusting my financial future or the protection of my family to anyone that I do n't know . If I have a problem , I want to know the person that will handle it , and who will be returning my call . I also know that internet sites are set up to give you `` best case '' prices when you shop , that can turn out to be different in reality . A live agent can give you an exact premium price , and details on any reasons why there might be difficulties in getting the best rate . I also am leery of hackers getting all of my information , and am not a fan of putting it out there in the cloud for the picking . There are a lot of things that are good to buy on the internet , but in my opinion , life insurance is n't one of them . Thanks for asking !
To shop for life insurance online , look for the following : 1 -RRB- Are they rated with the Better Business Bureau and/or do they have any seals showing that they meet standards for safety -LRB- e.g. TRUSTe -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Do they have good testimonials that sound like they were written by actual people ? 3 -RRB- Can you look up the names of the employees who work there and see their photos and/or read their biographies ? 4 -RRB- Important : Will you be talking to a licensed agent ? 5 -RRB- Do they sell multiple products for you to choose from ? 6 -RRB- Do they ask health questions and appear to understand what you are talking about ? 7 -RRB- Are they able to draw on experience in finding your best options ? 8 -RRB- Will they take the time to answer your questions in a pleasant and respectful manner ? 9 -RRB- Do they explain the process of applying , payment methods , policy features , etc ? 10 -RRB- Will they be there for you if you need help with your policy in the future ? Many online agents are simply independent agents who have an online presence . They want to keep up with shoppers who prefer to use technology , rather than travel to an insurance office , or invite an insurance agent to their table for the evening . Just looking at their bios and reading their answers , I 'd go to any of the top 20 agents on the leaderboard , and maybe all of them . Most are articulate agents who know their stuff . This website is a great place to start in shopping for life insurance online .
Shop , shop around . Shop online and over the phone to get the lowest rates possible . Buying auto insurance online is becoming more popular because of the convenience and flexibility it offers . Also calling auto insurance agencies are a great way as well ; some agents will shop multiple companies over the phone and give you the lowest price and you can purchase right on the spot . There are many service providers available online which makes it easy to get your automobile insured without even moving out of your home . The online agency provides all the relevant information necessary for the process and also provides an instant comparison of insurance rates from various service providers at a glance . You can save time and effort that you would have to otherwise spend on doing the research yourself or going out . Online or over the phone is a great way to save and find the cheapest auto insurance quote .
You can easily buy car insurance online and you may save a substantial amount of premium . Rates are usually regulated by the State Department Of Insurance , so an online broker 's rates can not be beat ! As an experienced broker with a top-rated website , we understand how confusing , frustrating and time-consuming it can be to shop for auto insurance online.You will find that claims are handled very efficiently by brokers and Agencies with experience in that field . I base that statement on 32 years of experience . Remember ... when you purchase online , it 's the SAME coverage and benefits you get by going directly to an agent that sells you a policy from that same carrier . The online method is quick and efficient and your paperwork is easy to read and understand . Once again , based on 32 years of experience in the business , I make that statement . By shopping , comparing , and researching all of the major insurers , consumers can pay less for their coverage with reputable companies . There are often many other discounts available that can potentially save hundreds of dollars per year . When you shop with an experienced broker and their website , you save ! Reviewing and comparing benefits helps you find the best policy available in your area . If you prefer working with a local broker , just make certain they are VERY experienced and can shop all of the major carriers for you . Either method will get you competitive pricing .
It 's easy to shop the rates with online quoters . It will vary depending on your age , zip code , tobbacco use , gender , etc. . Also which plan you choose will greatly affect the cost . My own site has a free online quoter you can use . It 's located at WEBSITELINK I recommend doing your research online but always find a local broker to purchase through . You will usually have a much better relationship and Medicare Supplements are not a one time purchase . The broker you buy from is your employee until you choose to fire him . He is your 1st call if you have a billing problem , question , or rate increase . When shopping rates online do NOT enter your correct name , address , phone number or anything to identify you until AFTER you have decided to buy . Most quoting sites look legit but are really data collecting sites that will sell your info as an insurance lead . You will have 50-insurance agents calling you all at once . Only use sites that will quote you the rates and everything you need to research and then YOU choose the agent you want to call . You will have a much better experience doing it that way .
To shop for life insurance online , look for the following : 1 -RRB- Are they rated with the Better Business Bureau and/or do they have any seals showing that they meet standards for safety -LRB- e.g. TRUSTe -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Do they have good testimonials that sound like they were written by actual people ? 3 -RRB- Can you look up the names of the employees who work there and see their photos and/or read their biographies ? 4 -RRB- Important : Will you be talking to a licensed agent ? 5 -RRB- Do they sell multiple products for you to choose from ? 6 -RRB- Do they ask health questions and appear to understand what you are talking about ? 7 -RRB- Are they able to draw on experience in finding your best options ? 8 -RRB- Will they take the time to answer your questions in a pleasant and respectful manner ? 9 -RRB- Do they explain the process of applying , payment methods , policy features , etc ? 10 -RRB- Will they be there for you if you need help with your policy in the future ? Many online agents are simply independent agents who have an online presence . They want to keep up with shoppers who prefer to use technology , rather than travel to an insurance office , or invite an insurance agent to their table for the evening . Just looking at their bios and reading their answers , I 'd go to any of the top 20 agents on the leaderboard , and maybe all of them . Most are articulate agents who know their stuff . This website is a great place to start in shopping for life insurance online .
To get the best deal on Term life insurance , you could start by looking at some quotes online , to get an idea of how they run . Then contact the website directly , or visit a local office , to find out how your health affects your life insurance rating . Keep in mind that some companies have more favorable guidelines for certain health conditions , so shopping several companies can be helpful . If you are using an online brokerage , they can do this shopping for you .
Yes you can apply for life insurance online . The life insurance industry is going through a very trying transition right now . The average career life insurance agent right now is over 50 years of age and the total number of agents is quickly declining . This is happening because more people like you are looking for life insurance online . The important thing for anyone who is a just starting the life insurance process to consider is that your buying experience will certainly be very different if you buy life insurance online versus contacting a local agent . Not better or worse , but different . Thinking about how you prefer to do business may help you decide which route to take . Are you part of the connected generation ? If your average day includes texting and Skype or FaceTime you will be perfectly comfortable buying your life insurance online . Do n't be concerned that you will be stuck with some impersonal call center . There are plenty of great online insurance agents that provide personal service . The only difference between them and your local agent is that your communication will be via your smart phone , not in person . If you 're not into the latest technology and you feel that personal interaction requires a handshake , you probably wo n't be comfortable getting life insurance online . You may find the process cold and impersonal . Do n't worry . Even though they 're getting older , there are plenty of great local life insurance agents that will give you advice and personal service your way . Many of them still make house calls and transact business over your kitchen table . The most important thing is not where you get life insurance , it 's that you do get life insurance . Good luck to you whichever route you choose :-RRB-
A study conducted by LIMRA and The Life Foundation in 2013 found that the number of people preferring face-to-face interaction with their life insurance agent had dropped to 50 % . That same study found that 85 % of life insurance shoppers would use the internet in some way in their purchase . Most life insurance that is sold online utilizes a combination of technology and personal interaction . E.g. . The shopper may find a quote online , then call that website to talk to an agent who will verify the rate and provide them with the application . So the question of how much life insurance is sold online is difficult to answer . But there is no doubt that many people looking for life insurance do like the convenience that online shopping provides .
Shopping for car insurance can be frustrating at best . I would recommend working with a broker who can and is representing several companies so they can shop around for you , giving you the REQUIRED coverage mandated by your state . You would want to look at other options as well including how fast are claims paid . Find out if the company has any complaints against them . Second , you can go online however there are those REQUIRED coverage 's which the online quoting may not put on for you . Yes , you do not have to talk to anyone however I believe you would be doing yourself a disservice .
There are several ways to shop for Medicare supplemental insurance . You can go online , contact a carrier , talk to a Medicare representative , respond to solicitations by mail , invite an agent into your home . Most people buy from an agent in their home . If the agent only offers one plan , that is n't really shopping is it ? And who really wants strangers coming in their home ? If you have recently turned 65 you are no doubt inundated with mail solicitations . All of this is too confusing for most people . Buying without help is not advised . You can call Medicare direct , and some states have people who will answer your questions and help you decide . But how do you know if that person has enough experience to give you helpful answers ? This may be their first week on the job . Some think they will get a better `` deal '' if they buy direct from a carrier . Again , you never know anything about the person you are talking to , and how do you know they will be available to answer future questions ? Or you can go online . This is convenient but there are challenges here as well . Unless you visit a site from a local agent , you are probably giving up your personal information to a stranger in another state that will sell that information to numerous agents . This leads to multiple phone calls . Who wants that ? Another issue with online searches is this . You will only see a handful of options and will never see the lowest rates . We allow visitors to run their own rates from our site . They receive regular email notes with helpful tips following their initial visit . We send out personalized quotes to those who want them , showing multiple carriers . If you have questions , we listen and provide advice on the pro 's and con 's of each plan . And we allow you to decide and move forward at your own pace . All this is done by phone and email . You never have to get out of your pajama 's and get to pick the plan that best suits your needs and budget .
How do you get the best auto insurance rate ? Of course , driving safely , buying `` insurance-friendly '' vehicles and maintaining good credit helps . But shopping for the best prices is a big factor . It 's extremely important to allow an experienced broker -LRB- with the help of their respected website -RRB- do the shopping for you . The combination of human and online comparison shopping ensures that you 'll find the lowest rates from the top-rated carriers .
I can see we have some conflicting opinions here , which is healthy ! I can not imagine that there are any life insurance companies who do not use computers to store their data about their customers , in this day and age . They are able to protect it through elaborate security measures . In the same way , online agencies can employ top notch security measures to protect their clients ' information . E.g. . In our office , the security is set up for multiple businesses , and our IT is extremely advanced . You should take safety into consideration when buying online . You should also take into consideration the credentials of the agent you are working with . Many online agents are working out of offices and simply using the internet to give their customers what they want : a convenient way to do business . People do not have to sacrifice safety , good service , and helpful professional advice to shop for life insurance online . They just have to select the right websites .
The internet has dramatically changed the way people shop for life insurance , period . Finding quotes online for California or any State are pretty easy . Find a website with a life insurance quote engine and begin your quotes , keep in mind that most quotes online are just estimates you could be better off speaking with a live independent broker . Make sure to speak with a broker because he or she will shop many different companies to get you the best price and policy possible . With some technology to day online you can get quotes and buy a policy within minute 's right from your home or office if you qualify .
From me , of course . If you are like most Americans shopping for health insurance is not only about as exciting as watching paint dry but you also find yourself in a world you do n't fully understand and where the people seem to speak a foreign language . Of course , you can always go online and shop around or , even more fun , go to HealthCare.Gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace and shop there . That works for some people but millions of others have learned the painful lesson that there are a lot of factors to consider when making a purchase as important as health insurance that are very difficult to present concisely on a web site . Seek out the services of a qualified life and health insurance agent . An independent agent not tied to one specific insurance company can shop the entire marketplace for you and can be impartial . An agent with additional professional certifications such as Chartered Benefits Consultant , Certified Employee Benefits Consultant , Registered Health Underwriter are examples of professionals who have taken their education and training beyond the simple requirements to get a life and health insurance license . These are the characteristics I would recommend you look for in a health insurance agent . It does n't cost you anything extra to get these professional 's services and they do all the work , can answer your questions , and point out those not so obvious issues with provider networks , how your specific medical and/or prescription needs are covered by different plans that the average consumer often misses or does n't even know to ask about . ObamaCare has not made all health insurance policies equal , quite the opposite in fact . Ask your friends or co-workers , do an Internet search for health insurance agents , or contact me . But you 'll be glad that you got professional guidance on this matter .
To buy life insurance online , you want to be certain that you are working with a reputable agency . Look at their `` About Us '' information to see if they have concrete contact information , some staff listed , testimonials , Better Business Rating , etc. . If you start with a good agency , the rest will take care of itself . You can review quotes by playing around with online quote engines . Some will allow you to see the quote instantly and input different face amounts and variables . But keep in mind that no quoter can cover all the details , so you will need to call the agency -LRB- or at least email back and forth a few times -RRB- to get an accurate quote . Starting out with the right quote and company will save you lots of time and frustration . When it is time to apply , some applications are done totally online . Some are done partially online and partially by phone with the carrier . Some are paper applications that you can fax or mail back . Your agent will guide you to the one that works best for you and helps you reach the outcome of your best price . Once the underwriting process is over , you will receive word of your approval . In our agency , we allow you to make changes to the policy at that time , if you like , so that you end up with the exact policy and price that you want . Each online life insurance site is different , but you will end up with a policy that is just like you would have gotten from a brick and mortar shop .
While you can purchase auto insurance through the mail or online , it is always best in my opinion , to purchase auto insurance through a local independent agent . An independent agent can help you shop several companies , find you not only the best rate , but can also provide sound advice based on your individual circumstances . A good agent can provide service ad help advocate any issues with the company . Contrary to what some would like you to believe , you do not save money on agent commissions by shopping online . A good agent can help you find the right coverage at the right price and provide the service you need .
When you go to buy a life insurance policy online , you will run into a number of options . From the most to least automated , here are some of them . 1 -RRB- You put your information into an online application and your policy is issued within minutes . I have seen these websites come and go and am not sure how many exist online at this time . Premiums are comparatively high because they do little to no medical underwriting , and everyone may be lumped together at the same price . It puts a lot of responsibility on the individual to read the fine print . 2 -RRB- You enter your information online and get a quote . At this time , you fill out an application with an agent over the phone , or fill out the app online and then do a phone interview with the life insurance company . Because this type of policy digs a little deeper , premiums are more competitive . I like this option for people who are in a hurry or who hate to fill out paperwork . I do recommend at least talking to an agent before filling out the application with the company , as an agent can steer you in another direction if there is something in your profile that would cause you to be declined or rated up . 3 -RRB- You get a quote online , then email or talk to an agent to determine whether that is your best rate . Then you are mailed or emailed an application that you can complete and fax , mail or email back . There may or may not be an exam involved . At the end , you have a policy just like you would have had if you had gone to a local insurance office . This is a good choice for large face amounts and for people with health conditions . It allows us agents to be involved from the get go so that we can prevent problems and make sure the policy is issued at your best possible rate . The best part about buying life insurance online is being able to do it all from the comfort and convenience of your home . You can make it as automated or personal as you like . I hope the above helps you determine what option is best for you .
Comparing auto insurance rates online is a great way to save money and find the best deals in your area . Finding the best prices does n't have to take a lot of time since a reputable website will do that for you . Carinsurancezoom.org is one of the premier trusted resources for quickly finding , comparing and applying for auto insurance coverage . There are no fees or costs when using the website . Of course , there are many online options when shopping for coverage . A US-based website operated by experienced brokers is an absolute must . And of course , being able to access the major companies on one website instead searching multiple websites is also helpful . Once you have viewed your online prices , typically , you can get assistance online or via email from the site owner and their staff . Of course , it 's always important to be aware of the cancellation date of your existing policy to avoid any lapse in coverage .
You can shop for a local agent or go online to a brokerage company that offers a vast inventory of life insurance companies . Many of these online firms offer side by side spreadsheets so you can see who the players are against their competitors . Shopping for the right company can really save you money .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Has The Best Auto Insurance Rates In California ?
The best insurance rates buy coverage that is adequate to meet your needs when you have a claim . When you are involved in a collision you wont care how much you paid , you will care how much the company will pay on your behalf and for your loss . A good insurance agent is the key to the best auto insurance . The agent should listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company you both select .
Auto insurance rates in California are not as high as you may think , in many areas . Regarding which company has the best rates , it depends on several factors including the type of car , your age , driving record and coverages . As experienced brokers , we research and compare all of the best prices from the top-carriers so you can easily get a free quote on our website . It pays to shop , and there 's no cost . California prices are often very competitive .
Actually California has some of the most competitive auto rates in the country due to Prop 103 . While everything else in California is expensive my clients are often pleasantly surprised that the auto insurance rates in California are not sky high . In California we have a different set of rules governed by the Prop 103 law that heavily regulates the rates in California and what an insurance carrier can charge . Insurance rates are not credit based but are heavily rated on your driving record and driving history .
In California the answer is anabsoluteyes . California is governed by proposition 103guidelinesand one of the major rating factors is driving record . Every personal lines auto insurance carrier must rate according to your driving record so 1 point will have an impact . This impact can be quite significant . 2 points in a 3 year period and you are no longer considered a California a good driver . This can cause rates to easily double in many cases . I often see clients who move in from out of state who have points on their driving record get a big shock to find out there rates areaffectedby a ticket . So what is a point you may ask . Any minor moving violation is 1 point . A major moving violation can be 2 points with a DUI coming in at 4 points . A minor at-fault accident is 1 point . A at-fault accident that includes bodily injury is 2 points . You may attend traffic school for a minor violation in most areas once every 18 months . All the rest you just have to wait out the 3 years until the points drop off your record . Also some insurance carriers reward drivers for clean driving records that go beyond 3 years so even though your points may have dropped off you still may not be receiving the best rates possible until 5-7 years . And by the way , Insurance carriers in California will check the driving record once a year minimum if not more often . If you move from one carrier to the next an upfront motor vehicle record is always ran .
In answering this question , we assume that CDL is an abbreviation for California Drivers License . If you are a California resident seeking to purchase Auto Insurance , it is assumed that you would have a California Drivers License thus not a method of lowering your insurance premium.The State of California allows insurance companies to base auto insurance premium rates on the experience of the driver ; thus the longer you are licensed , your premium would be lower . However , your driving record would be equally important as this would be another method of adjusting rates on a policy . We 'll be happy to answer any more specific questions if and when asked !
All auto insurers in California are subject to prop 103 laws and guidelines . This means a DUI is chargeable for 3 years , however the person in question with the DUI will not be a California good driver for 10 years . California good driver is a 20 % discount that would not be available by any Insurer operating in California . Not being a good driver in California can potentially make you unacceptable by certain carriers that will only accept California good drivers . Work with many Insurers including Allied and depending on your situation Allied most likely will accept you as an insured but you will not get the good driver discount .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
Rates will vary per individual in California . Rates are based on years driving experience , location , driving record and milesdrivenannually . We do not use credit in California . With those being the top 4 notnecessarilyin that order there are other factors to consider . Type of vehicle , occupation or if you are a good student with a 3.0 or better can have an impact on your rates . Other factors to consider better rates arecombininghome or renters insurance and auto insurance for multi-policy discounts . Multi car is another rating factor and whether your single or married is a rating factor . And of course what are the level ofcoverage 's chosen have adeterminingfactor on your rate . All these things should be discussed with a local independent agent who can shop different insurance carriers to find the right policy with the rightcoverage ` sto meet your insurance needs at an affordable premium .
Auto insurance rates in California are not as high as you may think , in many areas . Regarding which company has the best rates , it depends on several factors including the type of car , your age , driving record and coverages . As experienced brokers , we research and compare all of the best prices from the top-carriers so you can easily get a free quote on our website . It pays to shop , and there 's no cost . California prices are often very competitive .
When you are convicted of a DUI you will be required to notify the DMV of your financial responsibility . That will trigger a reaction by your insurer . They will know immediately that you have been convicted of DUI . What they do at that point will vary . At renewal you will find that you have been assessed points for the DUI and those points will trail you for 10 years in California . In California you will also lose your good drivers discount . Sometimes clients think that this is the time to shop for auto insurance . Unless you simply can not pay the premium , dropping coverage at this stage is not in your best interests . Your existing insurance company is likely to treat you with more consideration than any subsequent insurance company . By the time you pay the fine , pay for the drivers education course and face the doubling of your auto premiums you will determine that drinking and driving does not pay in California .
Insurance is regulated by state . Each state can adopt a different approach to the issue that you have raised . In California , the voters took rating matters into their own hands with a constitutional amendment . Sex or gender , as you say , is not a rating factor in California . That means that in California if you switch sex , switch back and switch again , nothing will change as long as you are residing in California , and driving a car insured in California .
The best life insurance in California is the one that best suits your needs . If you have a health problem , there are a number of companies in California that specialize in impaired risk life insurance . If you have perfect health , there are many good companies that will charge you within a few dollars of one another . The best way to find out your best life insurance is to call an agency , explain your health and the purpose of your life insurance , and let them guide you through some choices . There are many agencies that serve California on the internet or you can look in the Yellow Pages .
The financial condition of an applicant is not considered for auto insurance in the state of California . A bankruptcy shouldnt affect an application for auto insurance . In California auto insurance is based upon year , make and model of the vehicle , the driving record of the members of the household , the distance being driven and the location of the household .
In most states , Progressive Insurance offers Auto , Home Owners , Boat , RV and Umbrella policies . In California , my state , Progressive offers only Auto insurance . Progressive Auto Insurance tends to be very expensive in California . I 'm shocked at the amount of advertising dollars Progressive spends in the state when they do n't sell 4/5 products they advertise for .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
The fine in California for not having auto insurance is $ 796.00 . However I have seen cases where the judge has increased the fine up to $ 1500.00 depending on if you are a repeat offender . Also you license can be suspended for not having insurance . If you get into an accident with no insurance your license WILL BE SUSPENDED for up to one year for not having insurance and your car most likely will be impounded . Not only that . If you are at - fault in an accident with no insurance I hope you can afford an attorney . Not having auto insurance in California is taken very seriously .
Age alone is not the sole determing factor for pricing auto insurance in California . In California the policy is priced based on the driving record of the insured , the number of years the insured has been licensed , the year , make and model of the vehicle to be insured , the loss history of the insured , the location of the vehicle , and the use of the vehicle . While this list is not exhaustive it contains most of the important determinants . That being said a driver who is 25 and has been driving for nine years , would be considered an experienced driver and as such would probably pay the same as any other experienced driver , all other conditions being equal .
There is not one single `` best '' life insurance company in California , but there are several that offer a combination of high financial ratings , competitive premiums and excellent customer service . When shopping for life insurance in California , it is important to work with a knowledgeable independent agent who can shop all of the A rated or better companies to find you the best policy for your unique circumstances .
Auto rates are based on state law . In California there isnt any change in the rate because companies are not allowed to rate based upon age . In California they rate based upon experience . Drivers who have been licensed recently pay more than those who were licensed many years ago . Rates are changed at renewals but not based upon attained age In California .
Car insurance rates are rarely a moral issue . If guys have worse driving records than young women , the company can ask many states to allow them to rate them separately . In California , that isnt an option . There are only a few rating factors in California and sex isnt one of them . That doesnt make insurance cheaper , it merely means that there isnt a distinction between male and female drivers in California .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Percentage Of Small Businesses Provide Health Insurance ?
The percentage of small businesses that provide health insurance to their employees is hard to calculate . Firstly , the definition of a small business can vary . It could be considered as a few as 2 employees or as many as 50 . Also , this number will probably be dropping in 2014 , when many businesses decide to eliminate offering healthcare toemployees , since it is more cost-effective to pay a penalty .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
Due to how fluid and dynamic the small business world is you will never be able to get a perfectly accurate figure on how many small businesses offer health insurance to their employees . However , studies over the last few years have show a slow but steady decline in the percentage of small businesses who offer group health insurance to their employees . In 2013 we witnessed the first time that the estimated percentage of small businesses offering group health insurance fell below the 50 % level , coming in at a little over 49 % . It is projected that this level will decrease somewhat further -LRB- probably mid-40 % range -RRB- when 2014 statistics can be compiled .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
The percentage of small businesses that provide health insurance to their employees is hard to calculate . Firstly , the definition of a small business can vary . It could be considered as a few as 2 employees or as many as 50 . Also , this number will probably be dropping in 2014 , when many businesses decide to eliminate offering healthcare toemployees , since it is more cost-effective to pay a penalty .
No , statistically around 99 % large companies in the US -LRB- 200 + employees -RRB- offer health benefits , about 96 % of medium companies -LRB- 50-199 employees -RRB- offer health benefits , and about 92 % of small companies -LRB- < 49 employees -RRB- offer health benefits . There may be a significant impact on the small employer statistics as state and federal exchanges become available . However I can confidently say that any such statistical shift in the small employer health benefits market will most likely be a short term -LRB- perhaps 3-5 year -RRB- variation that will in time reflect a very small impact in the % of small businesses offering health benefits . The complex structuring options and technical details will render the small business exchanges as effective at delivering optimal results as online tax software is in helping someone who is not well versed in accounting manage pay-roll and state/federal tax obligations/deductions . Also the businesses who do not provide meaningful benefit programs to their employees will find it hard to compete with the other companies who are able to leverage such programs to provide them with a distinct competitive advantage . That being said the exchanges will revolutionize the marketplace of individual health insurance policies .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
That is a great question ! Typically when I split business , I split the commission . The reason is that I wanted the agent who shared in the business to feel that their effort in getting the business written was compensated properly , and appreciated . If the person getting you the apps knows the type of commission that you will receive for writing the business , and then receives from you a thank you and a very small fee by comparison to your commission , what is their incentive to give you more business ? In our line of work reputation is everything , and having one as a person who appreciates and rewards beats the pants off one of being greedy and selfish.If you would like info on percentage splits , please inbox me . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Normally , you can not deduct auto insurance from your taxes . If you are self-employed or own a business , a car used for that business can have expenses deducted with certain limitations . To fully deduct insurance and other expenses on a vehicle , it must be used 100 % for business purposes . If it is used for both personal and business , it becomes more complicated . With the simplest way , a flat amount per mile can be deducted for all business usage . The second way is to keep track of ALL expenses associated with the vehicle including gas , repairs , and insurance , as well as exact records about miles for business and personal use . The percentage of total miles used for business is the percentage of total expenses that can be deducted . Caution should always be used taking business deductions such as vehicle expenses and home office expenses as the rules are very strict and those types of deductions can increase the likelihood of an audit .
There remains a lot of confusion over this issue in the wake of the passing of the health care reform law -LRB- ObamaCare , the Affordable Care Act -RRB- and justifiably so . Technically speaking , ObamaCare does not force any employer to offer health insurance to their employees , their is no criminal penalty for failure to do so . That point made , the Affordable Care Act consists of a mix of tax incentives and tax penalties to supposedly induce employers to provide health insurance for their employees . First of all , for employers with 2 to49 employees there are no tax penalties at all for failure to provide health insurance to their employees . A tax credit is offered but with enough limitations associated with it that only a tiny percentage of small employers have ever taken advantage of it . For employers who are at and above the 50 full time and/or full time equivalent employee level they will be the ones who will be faced with tax penalties for failing to provide health insurance and/or failing to provide affordable health insurance to their employees . The first employers to be impacted will be those with 100 or more full time employees in 2015 . Then , starting in 2016 , employers in the 50 to 99 employee range will be subject to the same tax penalty . The tax penalty will be $ 2000 per employee per year and will be a non-deductible business expense . Not surprisingly , the situation is more complicated than I have just described but there is not space here to go into all the details involved . Suffice it to say , this is an issue of great concern to many employers , especially ones who have not offered health insurance to their employees or a large segment of their employees in the past . The restaurant , hospitality and trucking industries are some common examples of industries that can expect to be adversely impacted financially by the tax penalty . For consultation on this issue please feel free to contact me .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
There are still too many variables to provide you a definitive answer . The state or states your workforce is located in , the size of your small business -LRB- less than 50 or greater than 50 employees ? -RRB- , the ages of your employees/spouses/dependent children to be covered , the number of dependent children to be covered , perhaps tobacco usage , plus factors such as health plan design all vary from group to group but are critical features defining fully insured health insurance rates in ObamaCare compliant plan designs . Speaking in very generic terms based upon marketplace quoting as of July 2014 , I would estimate unit cost ranges for small group plans -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- on a composite rated basis to generally fall within the following ranges : Employee Only : $ 250 to $ 425 Median : $ 325 Spousal Unit : $ 280 to $ 500 Median : $ 395 Per Child Unit -LRB- 3 max -RRB- $ 85 to $ 175Median : $ 120 -LRB- Note : dependent children age 21 to 26 charged separate young adult rate -RRB- This is based onno exhaustive analysis , just from what I have seen and gathered from my peers here in the mid-south . If someone were to give me the vague `` what would health insurance costs be for my small business '' questionto dosome business cost projections these would be reasonable ranges to expect to work within and approximate average costs per covered unit to experience at this time .
what does Simple retirement plan mean ? It means that someone is using a boilerplate retirement plan created by the IRS to provide a retirement program for a small business . I love Simples as their name says it all . A Simple is a straight forward plan design with only a few requirements to comply with to have the plan . The best part for a small business owner is it costs next to nothing to provide . There is no testing of the plan which costs money . Just a nominal per head fee of active participants . The employer does n't pay fees for testing employees and accounting for employees who are n't in the plan . For a small business a Simple is a great choice for putting a retirement plan together for employees .
Group health insurance is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . It 's impossible to say what the `` average '' cost per employee is for health insurance . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of the business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you 'll need to contact a health insurance agent - working with an independent one will allow you to shop for quotes from multiple companies in one place . Having too many `` hands in the cookie jar '' can sometimes make things confusing . Feel free to contact me with any questions .
I presume from your question that you must be a health care provider or supply some type of service and/or product that is reimbursable under health insurance plans . First , you need to determine the competitive environment for your product or service in your marketplace . If you have lots of competition your negotiating position will not be as strong -LRB- perhaps nonexistent -RRB- as if there is limited competition for your product or service in your marketplace . The insurance company will know the answer to this question from their perspective so you need to know the answer too before engaging in discussions with insurance carriers . Know what the absolute minimum is that you can accept as payment for your product or service . In today 's environment cost is the main driver in provider contracting , any insurance carrier is going to want the lowest possible cost from any provider/vendor they contract with . What they want to pay could well be below your cost of providing the service . You will have to make a business decision if such an arrangement would make business sense in the overall context of your total business model . What is your unique selling proposition ? What do you offer that a competitor or other product does not provide or provide as well ? Do you offer a qualitative advantage , a price advantage , or both ? They are going to ask you these questions and expect you to prove it so be prepared . Do research on the insurance carriers . Does your target market align with theirs ? If your focus is on infant care calling on an insurance carrier who is more focused on the senior marketplace is obviously a waste of everyone 's time . Even among health insurance carriers that from the outside seem to be competing for the same market segment you will find upon closer examination that they all have their areas of market strengths and weaknesses and marketplace segments they focus on . Some are more oriented towards individual and small group health insurance while others really shine in the large group space . Knowing this in advance and knowing what your capabilities are will allow you to focus on the prospective carriers best aligned with the marketplace that is also the best fit for your product or service . Once you have these basics understood you can begin contacting the various insurance carriers and ask to be put in touch with the department and/or person who handles the insurance carrier 's provider contracting and you can let the games begin .
Group health insurance works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan Group health insurance is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , I recommend contacting an experienced broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . Having too many `` hands in the cookie jar '' can sometimes make things confusing . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Employer based health insurance -LRB- a.k.a. group health insurance -RRB- is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you 'll want to contact a health insurance agent - working with an independent one will allow you to shop for quotes from multiple companies in one place . Having too many `` hands in the cookie jar '' can sometimes make things confusing . Feel free to contact me with any questions .
Group health insurance is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you 'll need to contact a health insurance agent - working with an independent one will allow you to shop for quotes from multiple companies in one place . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your health insurance needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Wind Damage ?
Short answer is yes it does . Wind is a normal covered peril in a standard Homeowners ' policy . Now , how the coverage is applied may vary a bit depending upon the location of your home . If you are located in a coastal community as opposed to inland , some Insurance Companies may require a higher deductible for wind damage coverage . Some consider it separately , others lump wind together with hurricane . It may also be handled differently in areas that are more subject to tornadoes . It is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy .
Homeowners insurance comes in different forms ; in most States , if you have a Form HO3 -LRB- Special Form -RRB- or a Form HO5 -LRB- Comprehensive Form -RRB- , Wind damage is covered to your dwelling , other structures and personal property . If you have incurred damage as a result of wind , it is important to protect the structure from further damage immediately and file a claim with your insurance carrier . If you are not sure whether to file a claim and need advice , you should contact your insurance agent and discuss the options , size of the claim and prior claims activity that you may have had within 5 years . The policy deductible will apply to the claim , in many States , you will have a separate Wind deductible which may be expressed in the form of a percentage of the coverage section being claimed against . For a homeowners insurance quote , you may click here : WEBSITELINK
Yes it does . If a windstorm causes damages to your roof , siding , or a tree to fall on your home you will be covered under your homeowners insurance . If this has happened to you call your agent first . Then start getting estimates . If the damage is minor you may not want to turn in a claim .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
Homeowner policies typically cover wind damage to insured property . However , policyholders need to determine the deductible that will be applied in the event of damage from wind . For example , in Florida where wind is a particular frequency concern , carriers assign higher deductibles that are applied at settlement of a loss caused by wind . It is not uncommon for a deductible that is twice or more of the amount of dwelling coverage deductible for damage from other types of loss causes . The wind deductible is usually a lot higher than your standard homeowner policy deductible . Check with your local independent agency for a review based on your needs and budget .
Generally speaking yes . Windstorm is covered by your homeowners policy , but maybe treated separately by your policy as well . For example if you live in a coastal area wind coverage may be excluded and you obtain what coverage is available through a pooling arrangement such as a wind pool . For Example if you live in Galveston Texas you might you need three policies where as an inland customer would only need one.In Galveston your wind policy might be through the Texas Wind Insurance Association , your regular homeowners policy in the private market -LRB- exclusive of wind -RRB- . You may also be required to have a flood policy -LRB- from the National Flood Insurance Program -RRB- because your insurer does not want to see you in a dilemma of having one group say the damage was caused by wind borne water and another saying it is flood coverage after the loss . To keep your understanding of what is necessary visit with your agent and discuss your personal situation . One other thing I should mention is that depending on where you live you may have a separate , hurricane deductible , wind and hail deductible , named storm deductible . These are often per cent deductibles and can mean a substantial out of pocket costs in the event of a windstorm . They are not exclusively used in hurricane prone areas . For example in Austin Texas you might have a $ 1000 deductible for most homeowners coverage -LRB- perils -RRB- , but 1 % wind and hail deductible even though Austin is over 200 miles to the Gulf .
Typically mold is not covered since mold is produced by continual water penetration that is either undetected or ignored . When water damage is covered on a policy , it is usually only covered if the original cause of loss is covered . You state you were told the original cause of loss was wind damage . If the water damage occurred at the same time , and was a factor of the wind damage -LRB- both happened during the same storm -RRB- , then depending on the type of policy you have -LRB- not the insurance carrier , but the actual policy -RRB- , you may have coverage . There are two types of policies - Open Peril and Named Peril . This is the first item you need to know about the policy you hold . On an Open Peril policy , all perils -LRB- specific cause of loss -RRB- are covered unless they are specifically excluded . On a Named Peril policy , all perils are excluded unless they are specifically listed as covered . On most policies , water damage is listed as excluded , unless specific conditions are met . For example , the policies my company writes in my area covers for `` accidental direct , distinct and demonstrable physical water damage of covered property from direct contact with water , but only if the water results from : '' and then goes on to list what conditions need to be present . In my opinion , unless the water damage was specifically caused by wind damage , and both losses were reported at the same time , you might not have coverage for these items . And most likely not the mold damage regardless of the cause .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Homeowners insurance comes in different forms ; in most States , if you have a Form HO3 -LRB- Special Form -RRB- or a Form HO5 -LRB- Comprehensive Form -RRB- , Wind damage is covered to your dwelling , other structures and personal property . If you have incurred damage as a result of wind , it is important to protect the structure from further damage immediately and file a claim with your insurance carrier . If you are not sure whether to file a claim and need advice , you should contact your insurance agent and discuss the options , size of the claim and prior claims activity that you may have had within 5 years . The policy deductible will apply to the claim , in many States , you will have a separate Wind deductible which may be expressed in the form of a percentage of the coverage section being claimed against . For a homeowners insurance quote , you may click here : WEBSITELINK
Generally speaking , your homeowners insurance will coverage wind damage . There are instances where this wo n't be the case , but there would normally be a specific exclusion in your policy that says it does n't cover wind damage . I would recommend speaking to an insurance professional to ensure that the damage will be covered by your policy .
-- > Normal 0 All homeowners policies will cover your home and personal property should it be damaged but the type of damage you are covered for is defined in two general types of insuring agreements . One type -LRB- Named Peril -RRB- will tell you what specific types of damage you are covered for . The policies will actually name them ; fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , vandalism , etc. . For damage to be covered , you have to prove to the insurance company that the damage you sustained was caused by one of these named perils . The second type of insuring agreement -LRB- often referred to as all-risk -RRB- covers you for any direct damage unless the policy specifically excludes or limits it . Under this form of insurance , any damage is covered unless the insurance company can prove a specific exclusion or limitation applies . The burden of proof shifts from you proving you are covered under a Named Peril policy to the insurance company proving you are not covered under an All-Risk type policy . A small difference which means a lot should you have a claim . The term all-risk isnt used too much anymore ; this type of policy is often referred to as Special Form or Open Peril policies . Whatever you want to call them , this is the type of insuring agreement you should look for . Most of us are not prepared to prove anything to an insurance company . Its also much easier to understand what you are not covered for simply by reading the exclusions and limitations .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
Unless you have a roof exclusion on your homeowners policy a roof is covered for the perils of the policy . Perils would include fire , wind , hail , weight of snow , lightning , falling objects , vandalism and potential water damage if caused by a bursting pipe . The homeowners insurance policy does not cover normal wear and tear . Also wind in some areas may have an exclusion or a separate deductible .
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
Short answer is yes it does . Wind is a normal covered peril in a standard Homeowners ' policy . Now , how the coverage is applied may vary a bit depending upon the location of your home . If you are located in a coastal community as opposed to inland , some Insurance Companies may require a higher deductible for wind damage coverage . Some consider it separately , others lump wind together with hurricane . It may also be handled differently in areas that are more subject to tornadoes . It is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy .
It will , but it also depends upon where the water came from . If there is a heavy wind and rain storm and the wind damages your roof , causing rain water to leak in and damage the inside of your home , there will be coverage for that . If on the other hand , the heavy rain does not causedirect damage to your home , but raises the water table in your property , which causeswater to leak into your basement , it is possible that there would not be any coverage for that because ground waterdamage is usually excluded under a homeowners policy . Be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverge for failure of any sewars or drainage systems like curtain drains or sump pumps . If you have such coverage , then you will be more likely to be covered if your basement fills with water as a result of any failure .
A homeowners policy will cover the home and contents in the even of damage due to wind , fire , hail , smoke , etc. . It does not cover wear and tear and breakdown of your appliances . Nor does it cover plumbing and/or electrical wiring . Water damage is covered at an additional cost depending on what type of policy you have . Its always best to consult your agent on the specifics of your policy .
Your homeowner 's policy would cover your `` food '' the same way it would cover your couch or TV . The problem is if you have a standard homeowner 's policy , only damage caused by specific named perils ; Fire , Theft , Wind , etc. would be covered . Coverage on your personal property , furniture , clothing , dishes and yes food , should be the same as the coverage on your home . `` Any direct damage '' should be covered . Now all policies will have deductibles and specific limitations or exclusions butit will make it a lot easier to understand what you are or are not covered for . If your insurer does n't offer this `` Special Coverage '' on personal property or charges you a significant premium for it , you may want to consider another insurer .
Electrical wiring would only be covered if it is damaged by a covered peril . Homeowners insurance does not pay to replace out dated wiring or renovation of wiring . Homeowners insurance is not designed as a maintenance policy . It is designed to protect you from unforeseeable events such as fire , wind damage , lightning strikes and similar perils .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Why Do You Need Home Insurance ?
Most people buy home insurance because it is required by their mortgage company . A home is often the largest single investment made by a family . It also represents the largest risk that a family can assume . Anyone injured on your property can sue you for personal liability or property damage . You are vulnerable . The home is often your largest asset . If the house were to be destroyed , your loss would be substantial . Since you depend upon your home as a place to live , if it were destroyed there would be considerable additional expenses to find suitable lodging . There are many other reasons but it just makes common sense to insure such a significant asset .
Lets use the analogy of living in a home . You basically have two choices : to buy , or to rent . Suppose you rent . Why would you do that ? First of all , you dont have to put any money up . Nor do you have to pay any real estate taxes . Nor do you have to pay for any maintenance . Its basically a cheap way to put a roof over your head . But , you always have the option to buy . Suppose now you buy . Why would you do that ? Equity . You have something to show for your money . Your home attains a monetary value that can be exploited . Of course , it costs more . But you get more . And you still get a roof over your head . This model is useful for understanding life insurance . Term insurance is like renting a home . Its a pretty cheap way to get the coverage you need . No equity , no added value . But you can convert it to a permanent policy . Whole life equates to buying a home . You pay more , but you get more . There is cash available for you to use , in addition to the survivor benefit for your heirs - that roof over your head . Make sense ?
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Adequate home insurance coverage is very important , and the discussion should be had with a professional independent agent . The best way to answer this question is to provide some general information for the primary/main coverage types on the home insurance policy -LRB- please note that each state and company policy coverages and requirements vary . This is why it is important to review in detail with your professional independent agent -RRB- . Dwelling value : this is the coverage limit that protects the structure/dwelling . Ideally , this coverage limit needs to be set at the proper replacement cost valuation . In the event of a total loss -LRB- fire , tornado ... -RRB- , what is the amount of insurance coverage on your dwelling that you would need to get you back in that exact same house?The answer to this question is the dwelling amount coverage limit that your home insurance policy should have . Personal property/contents coverage limit : this is the coverage that provides protection for your personal belongings . It is suggested to take pictures of your belongings -LRB- especially your more valuable items -RRB- as well as have copies of the pictures and any receipts to provide proof of ownership in the event of a claim . Again , like with the dwelling value we discussed above , the question here is what is the value of all of your items in your house ? Or , what would thecost be toget everythingwhat you have now in your house if a fire or tornado destroyed it all?The answer to this question is the personal property contents limit that your home insurance policy should have . Also - please note that if you have a mortgage on your home , most often the lender will require the loan amount or 100 % ofthecalculated structurereplacement value to be the required dwelling coverage amount.This amount can vary , and to ensure that you are getting the coverage protection you need without overinsuring , please review with your local professional independent agent . Liability coverage/medical pay to others : this is about the least-expensive part of a home insurance policy , but it is very important to have . The minimal amount of liability coverage suggested to have for this coverage category is $ 300,000 , although usually the bump up in coverage to the $ 500,000 liability limit is usually very small . And , the medical payments to others coverage should be at $ 5000 . These coverages protect you from injury that an unrelated -LRB- visitor -RRB- sustains while on your property , or that you are deemed to be liabile -LRB- responsible -RRB- for . Please note that these are just a couple of the important insurance coverages that are included on your home insurance . There are many other coverages that might be included with the policy that you choose or there might be other suggested coverages that you can add to your home policy that gives you the extra coverage protection that you need . There is not a general coverage limit or value that is used for determining the proper coverages for your home insurance . Every client is different and so are their needs . Make sure that you review what your needs and coverage requirements are , and let an independent agent create a policy specifically for you and your needs .
Let me put it to you this way , if I may . If you do n't have a mortgage -LRB- which would require you to have and maintain a Homeowners ' policy -RRB- , and you are fortunate enough to have the complete financial where with all to fully rebuild your home if it were totally destroyed , and fully replace all of your belongings at the same time , you do n't need Homeowners Insurance . LIkewise , if you were financially sound enough to settle any law suit that might be launched against you as a result of the serious injury or death of another person or damage to their property caused by you and for which you are then legally liable , you do n't need Homeowners Insurance . Talk to your Insurance Professional . A well thought out and executed Homeowners policy would provide coverage for you for these types of potential losses for literally pennies on the dollar . Why do you need it ? The question is why would you not want it ?
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
The most probable scenario on why you absolutely need home insurance is that your mortgage company requires it . They want to ensure they get their money back in the event of a loss . If you are in a position to where your home is paid off then that is another story . However , by not carrying home insurance you are subjecting yourself tounnecessary risk . Your home insurance not only provides coverage for that home which you worked so hard to pay off , but also provides protection against liability . Meaning when the neighbors kid breaks his arm playing on yourswing-set and his parents want to sue you . Without home insurance , the neighbors may be the proud new owners of your home !
It is the single most important form of insurance and everyone regardless of single , married , kids , age , etc should have it . Think of it like this . You have auto insurance to protect a car , home insurance for a home , etc , but why would anyone not protect the only thing you really own and the loved ones that care about you with life insurance ? You can easily replace a car or a home with another , but how do you replace a life and the financial burden placed on the ones you love ? Life insurance allows you to do that and if you do n't have it I recommend contacting your local independent agent .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
You know ... I have a friend who works tireless hours to receive government benefits . One may wonder why he does n't get a job ?! Anyways , there are many moving parts in Fixed -LRB- Indexed -RRB- Annuities . -LRB- FA -RRB- But ` Do they work ' is a tad broad . Here are a few questions you may want to know , before moving forward with a FA : - Why are you thinking about a FA ? - What do you wish to accomplish ? - Do you need income now , later , forever -LRB- so long as you shall live -RRB- - with a spouse , or it for something else ? - Is liquidity -LRB- without penalty -RRB- an immediate concern ? - Is long term growth with protection of principal your primary goal ? Get where I 'm going with this ? In the world of FAs , there are many moving parts and many options . Did you know that Texas and Florida are the only two states in the US that have added protective benefits , built into annuities ? Point being , a good Agent / Advisor will take the time to do a thorough needs analysis to determine what you seek , if a FA suits your needs and if applicable show you two or three options and let you choose what YOU believe is best for you . Just my two-cents !
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Part A Cover Outpatient Services ?
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- covers an inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility -LRB- rehab -RRB- , hospice and some home health care . Medicare -LRB- Part B Medical -RRB- covers medically necessary services for the diagnosis and treatment of illnesses . These are Outpatient Services received at a doctors office , hospital , clinic or other health facility .
Medicare Part A is the hospital portion of the Medicare program . In 2013 your Medicare Part A deductible is $ 1184 per admission and covers your initial 60 day hospital stay . If your stay extends beyond 60 days there are per diem deductibles that must be satisfied . Medicare Part A covers inpatient hospital services .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medicare Part A is , in short , your hospital insurance . It covers inpatient hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hopsice care , and home health services . Please note , there are limitations to what Medicare pays and for how long it will pay for given services . If you want to have adequate coverage for long-term care types of services -LRB- e.g. nursing home care , hospice care , and home services -RRB- , you will want to supplement your Medicare coverage with a separate long-term care policy . Medicare Part B is , in short , your physician insurance . This part of Medicare covers things like doctor visits , lab tests , surgeries , ambulance services , durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- , and other outpatient services . Medicare Part A & Part B are commonly referred to as Original Medicare and only covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of expenses . While 20 % does n't seem like it 's going to have a high dollar figure , the bill can add up quite fast . The idea of a Medigap plan is to create a predictable expense structure . If you do n't have a Medigap plan and visited the hospital/had a surgery/etc . , you 'll end up with a massive medical bill real quick . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B covers certain doctor 's services , outpatient care , medical supplies including medical equipment , some preventative services such as flu shots , ambulance , mental health , and limited outpatient prescription drugs . There is a co-pay required for benefits received under Medicare Part B. Medicare supplement plans can cover the co-pay and pay for things that Medicare Part A and B do not cover .
Part B of Medicare covers doctor and outpatient visits for the diagnosis and treatment of your health conditions . These are Outpatient Services received at a doctors office , hospital , clinic , or other health facility . There is an annual deductible of $ 166 for Part B services and after the deductible has been met Medicare covers 80 % of your Part B medical expenses and you are responsible for the other 20 % unless you have a Medicare Supplement Plan . Most people who sign up for Medicare this year will pay monthly premium of $ 121.80 to the Federal Government for their Part B coverage .
Medicare Part B is a necessity if Medicare is going to be your primary insurance . Part B covers doctor and outpatient visits for the diagnosis and treatment of your health conditions . These are outpatient services received at a doctors office , hospital , clinic , or other health facility . There is an annual deductible of $ 166 for medical services under Part B and after the deductible is met Medicare covers 80 % of those expenses . If you have a Medicare Supplement is will pay the 20 % Medicare leaves off .
Outpatient Surgery is covered under Medicare Part B. Part A covers Hospital stays . Part B covers outpatient costs such as outpatient surgery , doctor visits , outpatient lab and xrays . Under Part B you are responsible for 20 % of the Medicare approved amount . Some states allow a doctor to charge up to 15 % more than the Medicare approved amount that would also be your responsibility .
Medicare Part B covers services and supplies that are needed to prevent or treat diseases or health conditions . While Medicare Part A generally covers time spent in the hospital -LRB- in addition to skilled nursing facilities and some other services -RRB- , Medicare Part B generally covers medically necessary doctors ' services , hospital outpatient services , durable medical equipment , preventative care , labs and tests , ambulance , and some other services .
Medicare Part A is called Hospital Insurance . With some exceptions , it covers inpatient services at hospitals , skilled nursing facilities and rehab facilities , as well as home health and hospice services . Medicare Part B is called Medical Insurance . Again , with some exceptions , it covers doctor 's services , durable medical equipment , hospital outpatient services , labs , mental health care , some preventative care , and some home health and ambulance services . All the services must be medically necessary and must be approved by Medicare to be covered .
Psychiatric coverage , inpatient and outpatient , are covered items under Medicare . Inpatient care is under Medicare Part A , outpatient with Medicare Part B. Outpatient care does not include job testing or training , or support groups . Inpatient coverage does not cover private room unless medically necessary or private duty nursing . Medicare deductibles and coinsurance apply .
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
Medicare Part B covers your doctors and outpatient services such as blood tests , X-Rays , MRI 's . and other outpatient testing . Part B also covers Durable Medical Equipment such as walkers , emergency service , flu shots , diabetic foot exams , Glaucoma testing , home health services -LRB- limited -RRB- , dialysis , and certain types of drugs in addition to an annual wellness exam . For a comprehensive answer see Medicare & You 2013 edition or go to Medicare.gov . You can also speak with a good agent specializing in Medicare and the needs of older adults .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare Part B covers most outpatient medical services after you have paid the deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- . Most people think Part B is for doctor visits , but it is much more than that . Other outpatient services include outpatient surgery , MRI , CT , X-ray , infusion therapy , DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- and more .
Medicare covers the same basic health care in Massachusetts as in the rest of the country . Part A covers hospitalization , home health , hospice , and some nursing home care . Part B covers outpatient care , medical equipment , some therapy , some prescription drugs , and misc other services and items . Medicare Part D covers prescription drugs . Medicare supplement plans cover some of what Medicare Part A and B does not .
Medicare gap insurance , Medicare supplement insurance , Medigap ... all the same . Like Kleenex and tissue , the terms are interchangeable . Original Medicare only covers about 80 % of your hospital and outpatient charges . Seniors with a healthy bank account may not need or desire to purchase a Medigap -LRB- supplement -RRB- plan . While you may be healthy now , your health can change at any time . If you are hospitalized 3 times during a calendar year for unrelated medical conditions you will have to pay a deductible of $ 1184 -LRB- 2013 Medicare Part A deductible -RRB- for each admission . Medicare Part B outpatient charges can become expensive as well . After you have paid the calendar year Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- for 2013 -RRB- you are responsible for 20 % of the remaining charges not paid by Medicare . An $ 800 CAT scan can leave you owing several hundred dollars . Medigap plan F is the easiest to explain . It covers everything approved by Medicare Part A and Part B but not paid by Medicare . Plan F covers deductibles , copay 's , coinsurance . Plan F is the most popular , purchased by about half of those who buy Medicare supplement plans . Plan G -LRB- or in some states , D -RRB- is next followed by plan N .
Medicare can help pay for drug abuse treatment in both the inpatient and outpatient settings . Inpatient settings would be covered by Part A and outpatient settings would be covered by Part B . The services must be medically necessary and completed at a facility/with a provider that accepts Medicare . Medicare would cover about 80 % of the costs and you would be responsible for the other 20 % - a medigap plan may be able to cover the other 20 % for you .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Can I Compare Home Insurance Quotes In Georgia ?
The trick to this is getting quotes that are comparable.There are so many more nuances in Homeowners coverages than on auto . So start out with what coverages you have now . Start with the amount of insurance on Coverage A of your policy . Does this really reflect the replacement cost of your property ? Now look at the ancillary coverages : Do you have water/sewer back up ? Does the limit include both dwelling and contents or only one or the other . Do you have Law and Ordinance Coverage what is the percentage ? What about personal injury coverage ? Do you have a schedule or need specific coverage on jewelry , watches or furs or similar expensive items limited in the existing policy by a dollar value ? If so what is it ? Do you need special circumstantial coverage for a home based business , ? Do you have home Warranty Coverage ? Do you have Earthquake coverage ? Is it constrained by a per cent deductible ? If so what is it ? I think you will get the picture . then I would suggest you give an independent agency a call or visit their website . We would be glad to help you , but perhaps you are not in the Atlanta area and want some local contact . We understand that but our recommendation to an independent agent is still sound advice as they typically will have multiple companies to compare .
To find the cost of life insurance in Georgia , you can go to an online quote engine that allows you to choose the state of Georgia when selecting your quote . An instant life insurance quoter will allow you to change some of the variables so that you can compare prices for different term lengths and face amounts .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
The best way to find the cheapest health insurance in Georgia is to work with an independent agent . That health insurance agent does n't work for just one carrier so they will be able to show you plans from all the major carriers . A lot of agents will also have a website -LRB- like ours -RRB- where you can compare quotes instantly online .
Health Insurance rates in Georgia are going up . Each family 's cost is going to be different . Your best resource is a local broker that represents multiple companies including major medical companies . The rates in Georgia are different in the Atlanta metro area versus other parts of Georgia . You will need to look at the networks in your area and determine if your doctors are in the network being offered by the insurance company . Health Reform has brought challenges to the price of family coverage . There are new options in the Georgia market to help handle the rising premiums . You might consider clinic programs , tele-medicine , high deductible plans , or many other solutions that lower costs and improve Out of Pocket expenses . The Health Insurance world is changing and you will need help . Do a web search for your area and health insurance and do a review of your current situation to determine if you can do better .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
There are many websites that offer you the chance to see free life insurance quotes by inputting your information . That is a good place to find life insurance in Georgia . Be sure that the website uses privacy measures and has good reviews . Getting referrals or looking at blogs is another way to find a good life insurance agency in Georgia , as is reading answers from a website like this one .
Health insurance is regulated by each state . Before you can buy a policy in Georgia -LRB- as an example -RRB- a carrier must file their policy form and rates with the state Dept. of Insurance and wait on approval . This is a long and costly process . About a year ago GA passed a law that allowed carriers to market products from other states in Georgia . So far not a single carrier has filed for approval to sell in Georgia . Despite what some people believe , even if you were able to buy coverage from another state the savings would be nominal , if anything at all .
Humana offers two kinds of Medicare coverage . In some areas you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan . Advantage plans vary by zip code and may not be available in your home town area . Most people will want to consider traditional Medicare and a Medigap plan . Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , B , C , F , K , L , N and Hi F in Georgia . Compare rates before you buy .
The cost of health insurance for a family can vary depending on the plan you choose , the state you live in various other factors such as age and smoking status . The quickest way to find out what health insurance costs for a family would be to go to a website for an independent agent that will let you run a quote or you can call us . Our website allows people to be review plans from all the major carriers in under 60 seconds . Click `` other '' on our website to go the the page to run a quote for a family . You can also give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 . We have helped many clients in Texas , Florida , Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina , Michigan and Colorado find a great health insurance plan for their family .
AARP has endorsed United Healthcare as their carrier of choice for Medicare supplement plans . The plan selection is a bit limited compared to other carriers . In Georgia for example they only offer Medicare supplement plans A , B. C. F , K , L and N . There are almost always plans with other carriers with lower rates .
If life insurance proceeds in Georgia are left to a person as beneficiary , creditors can not take the money away from the beneficiary to pay the debts of the insured , -LRB- unless the beneficiary was co-signer to that debt -RRB- . If the life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , then creditors in Georgia can access those benefits to pay off the debt owed them by the deceased .
Some Blue Cross plans will write life insurance , usually through a sister company . In South Carolina life insurance policies are issued through Companion Life Insurance Company . In Georgia , life insurance policies are written by Greater Georgia Life Insurance Company , Some Blue Cross companies are stock carriers , others are mutual , and a few are not-for-profit companies .
Essentially there are two ways to buy a Medigap plan in Georgia . You can buy direct from a carrier or through an agent . When you buy direct from the carrier you get the same plan at the same rate as buying from an agent . Carriers have in house representatives that can only tell you about their plan . They do n't know about competitor plans and are prohibited from discussing a competitor plans . Once you purchase a plan from a carrier any follow up questions are handled by a CSR rep. When you call you can expect to have an automated service answer your call , following the obligatory `` Press 1 for English '' you will be told to `` Please listen carefully as our options have changed '' . From there you will be routed most often to voice mail . Your call will be returned on their schedule , not yours . You will never talk to the same person twice . Or you can buy from an agent that lives in Georgia and is familiar with plans in your area . Some agents will insist on coming to your home , while others will allow you to purchase over the phone using email and your mailbox . Some agents will only represent one carrier . If you go that route you might as well buy direct . Most agents will represent several carriers and help you understand the pro 's and con 's of each carrier . They will be familiar with rate history and can tell you which ones have a better track record of customer service . There are about 15 or so carriers in GA that offer Medigap . Some only sell direct or through their own representatives . Others use independent brokers that represent several carriers . Maybe a third of carriers make their rates available online but most will only disclose rates if you talk to them direct or through an agent . Hint : Some of the most competitive rates are not found online ... Most of the plans use issue age rating but a few , including the top two carriers -LRB- ranked by sales -RRB- use attained age brackets . You need to understand the difference in pricing structure and rate history if you want to avoid sticker shock on renewal . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
You can easily compare term life insurance quotes by going to a website that shows you quotes from multiple companies . If you pick a website with `` instant '' quotes , the quotes will come up comparing quotes from different companies , and you can then change variables to compare quotes on different policies within that company . Once you see a policy you are interested in , be sure to talk to someone at that agency , or communicate by email , so that you can be sure you qualify for that particular rate . No quote engine can cover every question , and you may find that there is an even lower price out there for you , or a policy that works better for your needs . But comparing quotes online is a good place to start .
The best Medicare supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan in Florida is the one that fits your own needs and budget . When you consider all Medicare supplement insurance plans with the same letter are identical in every way except the premium , the decision is much easier . Medigap plan F is the most popular , mostly because it is oversold . Far too many agents promote the plan because it is easy to explain . It is also the most expensive plan and the one that pays the highest commission . Just last week I showed a couple in south Georgia how they could save over $ 1700 per year by making a simple change in coverage .
Your best Medigap plan is the one that is affordable and covers what you expect the plan to cover . All Medicare supplement insurance plans with the same letter are identical in every way except the premium . Medigap plan F is the most popular , but It is also the most expensive plan . A couple from south Georgia needed to save money on their Medigap plan . After a few moments on the phone , I showed them how to save over $ 1700 per year by making a simple switch in coverage . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
You can compare life insurance quotes by going to several different companies , or you can compare life insurance quotes by going to one website or agency that sells multiple companies . The advantage of doing your shopping in one place is that you will know you are comparing `` apples to apples '' . Life insurance has a dizzying amount of variables to consider , and every agent has their own idea as to what is important . When you compare quotes on a website quote engine , you are comparing the same plan against one another , although you still should visit with an agent to be sure that the one you select is one for which you actually qualify .
The cost of prenatal and delivery will vary greatly by area , level of care needed , etc. . I have several clients in Georgia that have successfully negotiated with the doctor and hospital and set up a prepayment arrangement . A normal vaginal delivery without complications , including prenatal care , can run around $ 8000 to $ 9000 dollars . Add another $ 2000 for scheduled c-section .
As far as I know , any carrier that offers Medicare supplement plans in your state will also include plan F. For a lot of reasons , Medigap plan F is the most popular plan sold -LRB- and purchased -RRB- . Every statistic I have seen shows Medicare supplement plan F participation in excess of 50 % and usually closer to 70 % . In other words , for every 100 Medicare supplement plans bought in a state , 50 - 70 are plan F . While F is the most popular plan , it does not mean it has the best value . Most of my Georgia Medicare supplement clients purchase plan G and enjoy saving $ 300 or more each year vs. what they were paying for plan F with another carrier .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Do Auto Insurance Agents Do ?
Auto insurance agents are primarily tasked with the process of finding new clients for whom they can write insurance policies . Some auto insurance handle administrative duties like processing claims or policy changes , but this is very commonly shifted to support staff hired by the auto insurance agent so they can spend more time finding new clients .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Well , what is the best major to have to be an insurance agent ? First let me qualify this by saying you do n't have to have a college degree to be an agent , nor is there really a major to become an insurance `` agent '' . You can do several business type majors that would work perfectly for working on the company side of insurance . Finance , computer science , math , accounting and so on would work for the company side . For the agent side ? A bit different . I guess I can tell you what my choices were from college . Originally a accounting/computer science major who in my 4th year decided to switch to marketing and industrial psych . The business background helped because when you are an agent you are in business for yourself and really by yourself . So understanding overhead , management , advertising are all pluses . However , I have the most mileage from the industrial psych classes . Industrial psych is workplace psych where you study why people do what they do at work . That education has helped me greatly as insurance sales as an agent really is about forming relationships and trust if you want a long term business relationship . Just remember no matter what you do , if you go into this business there will be people that love you and people that do n't . Try and focus on those who love you and let somebody else have those that do n't . Honestly there is enough to go around .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
The average cost in the US has been around $ 850 for the past several year . My data could be a bit off and old , but in the last several years competition for auto business has kept pricing static . Here is the basic issue question : I do n't know who you are in a demographic sense , but also in the sense of needing coverage to protect yourself . . Auto Insurance is regulated by the various 50 states and can a bit different in what coverages are required to be offered.But here is what typically comprises and auto policy : Bodily Injury Liability -LRB- protection for the people you kill or injure -RRB- Property Damage -LRB- for the car you hit or the 18 wheeler you force off the road unintentionally -RRB- Medical Payments for the little issue that happens in your car that you do n't want to have to file suit against some one to be indemnified -LRB- i.e. your passenger catching their finger in the closing of a door -RRB- Collision for damage to your own car in a wreck or hitting a curb or a pot hole etc. . ComprehensiveCoverage : for theft , flood , hail , falling trees , broken windshields etc And last , but probably the most important coverage on your policy , Uninsured and Under-insured Motorist Coverage So , despite all the ads to the contrary you ought to take more than 15 minutes to figure , with the help of an agent , what exposures you have . The worst scenarios have nothing to do with fixing your cars , it is about fixing peoples lives and keeping you assets . So to answer your question I would need to know what do you have to lose , if you cause injury to someone else , because what you do not pay for in insurance you will pay for on your own including future garnishment of your income . A fairly decent rule of thumb to consider things by would be to look at your lifestyle . If you already own your own home -LRB- including with a mortgage -RRB- you need a minimum of 100/300/100 spit limits of Bodily Injury Coverage -LRB- that protects the people you hit -RRB- and you should carry the same to protect yourself , your family and passengers in your car with the same limit of 100/300/100 for Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage . If you do not understand how all of these pieces of the coverage fit together then you should really seek out an Independent agent who sells for multiple companies and can tailor the policy to your needs If you live in AZ , CA , TX , GA , or MO I would be glad to assist you -LRB- call 1-866-933-4372 -RRB- -LRB- open 8 AM to 8 PM Est Monday through Friday -RRB- . If you live elsewhere seek out an Independent Agent in your area Good luck to you and I hope this answer helps some Jack Heller , CPCU
The trick to this is getting quotes that are comparable.There are so many more nuances in Homeowners coverages than on auto . So start out with what coverages you have now . Start with the amount of insurance on Coverage A of your policy . Does this really reflect the replacement cost of your property ? Now look at the ancillary coverages : Do you have water/sewer back up ? Does the limit include both dwelling and contents or only one or the other . Do you have Law and Ordinance Coverage what is the percentage ? What about personal injury coverage ? Do you have a schedule or need specific coverage on jewelry , watches or furs or similar expensive items limited in the existing policy by a dollar value ? If so what is it ? Do you need special circumstantial coverage for a home based business , ? Do you have home Warranty Coverage ? Do you have Earthquake coverage ? Is it constrained by a per cent deductible ? If so what is it ? I think you will get the picture . then I would suggest you give an independent agency a call or visit their website . We would be glad to help you , but perhaps you are not in the Atlanta area and want some local contact . We understand that but our recommendation to an independent agent is still sound advice as they typically will have multiple companies to compare .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
Bottom line question : What is the best type of life insurance to have ? Bottom line answer : The type that is in force when you die.Keep in mind that life insurance is the only financial vehicle that provides an income-tax free lump sum of money to the one who depends on the insured person financially upon the trigger-point of the contract : the death of the insured . Focus on that death benefit or face amount . Do n't be distracted by cash values , living benefits , etc. to begin with . -LRB- That can come later -RRB- . As far as choosing a `` good life insurance policy '' , the answers are endless . But , here are a few basic parameters to guide you to the answer that is best for you :1 . Ask the beneficiary , `` What would you do if I -LRB- the proposed-insured -RRB- were to die today ? '' . `` Do '' is the key word . This is not a quantitative inquiry . It has to do with values . What matters most to the person you care about ? 2 . Then , `` what would be the negative financial impact to the beneficiary if I were to die today ? '' This is n't that hard for most people . It has to do directly with what the beneficiary believes they would do if the insured dies . For instance , if the beneficiary would sell the house , do n't put that into the equation . If there 's debt , do put it in the equation . Income replacement is typically the most important . But , it may not be if there are no children and the beneficiary has a career . See ? It all depends on what the beneficiary would do . 3 . Once the amount is determined , my suggestion is to first buy a permanent plan of insurance that would cover final expenses . That does n't have to be a large face amount . But , it should be big enough to take care if immediate funeral and burial costs projected to mortality age .4 . Cover the rest of the need with low-cost , guaranteed level premium and fully convertible -LRB- exchange all or part of the term to a permanent plan of insurance without the need to medically qualify -RRB- term.Now you can discuss bells and whistles . But , only pay the extra amount those cost if -LRB- big if -RRB- they have value specific to your situation . An experienced agent who actively listens -LRB- let 's you talk more than s/he does -RRB- can guide you .
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Yes they do but most agents ca n't issue it in many states . However you can get it online and still keep your auto with an agent and still get the multipolicy discount . I just suggested to one of our clients to do this and it had her auto policy lowered160 .00 for 6 months just by getting the renters policy . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive and well worth it many cases your auto lowers so much that it is almost like getting your renters policy for free Talk to your local agent they can help you .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Sell My Life Insurance ?
We need to be clear here about if you really mean selling or surrendering your Life Insurance . Please look at my other answers regarding surrendering a policy which I recently addressed . Can you `` Sell '' your Life Insurance : Maybe ! We do work with a company that will give lump sums of money for life insurance policies which are no longer wanted or needed . Simply , you turn the ownership over to this company , they continue paying the premiums until death . Of course , you have to qualify before anything will happen . Seek me out if you would like to review the possibilities on your life insurance policy .
There are `` life settlement '' companies who will buy some life insurance policies from those who no longer want or need their coverage . Most life insurance policies have no value to them , and therefore , are not `` sellable '' . The policies they are looking for are almost always permanent policies with cash value that is not in danger of running out due to increasing premiums . They also are looking for insured persons who have a short remaining life expectancy due to illness or old age . I have a questionnaire that can quickly determine if your policy is of interest to reputable life settlement companies , and will oversee the process , if interested .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Let me share my experience.I 'm a licensed fee-based -LRB- accept no commissions -RRB- insurance consultant who has studied insurance , obtained a number of industry designations , owned and operated a general insurance agency for nearly forty years and helped thousands of insurance consumers with their insurance questions . I have long harbored ill will toward GEICO and other insurers who chose not to do business with independent agents . I believe their sales staff -LRB- and that of other insurers selling direct to the public -RRB- are trained to sell what the insurer wants to sell ; not what the consumer really needs . But I recently sought to purchase auto insurance for myself and checked out a number of on-line insurance offerings . GEICO 's premiums were one third of those indicated by E-surance , Progressive , and several others . The application process and live discussion with a sales person was cordial , professional and non-threatening . I was able to access my coverage information on-line , pay premiums directly and obtain insurance cards.Actually my experience was better than any I 've had with any independent agent . My conclusion , it is still important to know what you need and want . It is you against a large insurer and that means be cautious . But for my money I certainly would consider GEICO as an insurer.If nothing else they deserve a look .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Life insurance is not hard to sell . It 's actually very easy to sell . When you 're selling life insurance the main part of your job is prospecting for the right people . You are looking for the people who are aware that they need life insurance . Think of it this way . If you were selling swimming pools it would be very hard to sell them to 90 % of the people . But if you talked only to people who own homes , had yards and been thinking about buying a swimming pool it would be pretty easy to sell them . Selling life insurance is the same way . It 's very easy to sell to the right people and it 's impossible to sell to the wrong people .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can An Illegal Immigrant Get Life Insurance ?
Most life insurers in the US stipulate that the proposed insured must be a permanent resident of the US . That means a US citizen or a non US citizen who is a lawful permanent US resident -LRB- green card -RRB- or on certain visa types . There would also have to be a means to pay premiums and a demonstrable life insurance need i.e. generating earned income or assets to protect here . Some insurers have developed foreign national programs that can also work in situations where established US interests and ties exist plus meeting some additional criteria . Citizens of some countries may not be eligible . It can be a complex area of field underwriting - so much so that our firm has developed a special questionnaire to help shop for coverage . Be sure to work with a life insurance professional with experience in this area .
There are several life insurance companies that do not ask the citizenship question . Therefore , an illegal immigrant can purchase life insurance regardless of citizenship status . You will need to shop to find those carriers as most mainstream life insurance companies will require citizenship or permanent resident status . In order to purchase life insurance all of the other questions must be answered and there must be reasonable health , means to pay premiums , a need for the life insurance and an insurable interest as a beneficiary . I would recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker to help find those life insurance carriers that do not ask the citizenship question .
Life Insurance is sold internationally , so as long as a person can show he has the means to pay and can qualify health-wise , his alien status is not an issue . I have not seen any question on a life insurance application that would disqualify a person due to alien status .
The short answer is it depends upon the state . One of the most basic principles of insurance is a person/company must have an insurable interest in the property . In order to have an insurable interest in an automobile a person must have a valid drivers license and sometimes a registration . If a state allows an illegal immigrant to obtain a drivers license , then that person can obtain auto insurance . If the person can not obtain a drivers license from that state , he can not obtain auto insurance and even being behind wheel is illegal . Political debates aside , an illegal immigrant should find a state where he/she can register for a drivers license and get auto insurance . This not only benefits them because they will get property and liability coverage , but it will also benefit other drivers because it provides them something to recover from in the case of an accident .
The medicare.gov website states the following : `` Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . '' However , millions of dollars have been paid out to illegal immigrants in Medicare benefits . On the other hand , millions of dollars have been paid in to Medicare by illegal immigrants who will be unable to collect Medicare benefits when they turn 65 .
There are several life insurance companies that do not ask the citizenship question . Therefore , an illegal immigrant can purchase life insurance regardless of citizenship status . You will need to shop to find those carriers as most mainstream life insurance companies will require citizenship or permanent resident status . In order to purchase life insurance all of the other questions must be answered and there must be reasonable health , means to pay premiums , a need for the life insurance and an insurable interest as a beneficiary . I would recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker to help find those life insurance carriers that do not ask the citizenship question .
No , an illegal immigrant can not purchase life insurance , as far as I know . Life insurance applications usually ask fora Social Security Number , and also ask about about citizenship . Some will only issue to persons that are US citizens , others will accept Green Cards , and others will also accept work visas .
Illegal immigrants may not be the issue here . The issue is more likely life insurance on foreign nationals , which in some circumstances can be achieved . The country of the foreign national is a critical component to consider as each life insurance company has differing rules of engagement with each country .
Most everyone is required to have an approved health insurance plan under Obamacare provisions , but there are exceptions to the mandate . Churches and religious institutions are exempt from the employer mandate . Illegal immigrants , those who are in prison and members of Native American -LRB- American Indian -RRB- tribes are also exempt from the mandate .
Undocumented immigrants can not get health coverage through the Affordable Healthcare Act . You will not be penalized or fined for not having purchased health insurance . If you are part of a mixed family where one member is a U.S. citizen and may be eligible for the healthcare exchange there are some circumstances where they may be included on the family policy . Undocumented immigrants can get limited services for an emergency medical condition through Medicaid , if they are otherwise eligible for Medicaid in the state . There are private companies who sell health insurance to undocumented immigrants including companies who offer global insurance.The global companies usually require that you have not been in the country more than a year or have a special visa . It is very affordable and good in the states and if you travel outside the country .
Sure can ! In California , many auto insurance companies will offer coverage without regard to your immigration status . We have several carriers that ask absolutely 0 questions pertaining to immigration status so you would be able to purchase the insurance without any worries whatsoever of anybody finding out about your immigration status .
Guardian Life is one of the most highly ranked life insurance companies among its peers and offers its policy holders one of the strongest balance sheets of any financial institution . It was founded as a mutual company in 1860 by German immigrants and was named Germania Life Insurance Company .
There are many IRS qualifying events that allow you to apply for health insurance after Open Enrollment has expired . You will be eligible for federal subsidies and pre-existing conditions will be covered under this `` special '' enrollment period -LRB- SEP -RRB- . As a health insurance broker with more than 33 years of experience , this topic is very routinely discussed with consumers on a regular basis . Some of the most common `` events '' include : 1 . Exceptional circumstances -LRB- such as natural disasters and medical emergencies -RRB- near the deadline 2 . Getting married -LRB- legally -RRB- 3 . COBRA expiration 4 . Moving to a new location outside the provider network 5 . Birth or adoption 6 . Citizenship change 7 . Losing existing health benefits 8 . Turning age 26 and/or no longer covered on parents policy 9 . Misinformation , misrepresentation , or inaction on the part of entities providing formal enrollment assistance 10 . Enrollment errors due to technical issues 11 . System errors related to immigration status 12 . Display errors on marketplace websites 13 . Getting released from jail 14 . Misinformation about availability of premium tax credits for victims of domestic abuse who are married but not filing a joint tax return
When can individuals enroll after May 1 , 2014 ? Here are the Qualifying Life Events that will allow an individual to purchase health insurance before January 1 , 2015 Loss of minimum essential coverage Marriage , birth , adoption Gain citizenship or qualifying immigration status Enrollment errors by Marketplace Qualified health plan violates its contract Change in eligibility for tax credits and/or cost sharing Move Enrolled in non-qualifying employer coverage Lose employer coverage Student graduates college and loses student health plan
This is a philosophical question that needs to be answered by the moralists of our culture . The Medicare program is actuarially unsustainable at the current population of the U.S. and the anticipated influx of immigrants . It covers most Americans , but means testing is now a discussion point in the debate of all government support programs .
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
Yes , if however the overdose is an illegal drug and you die within the first two years , there may be a problem . Every Life app has a question regarding illegal drug use . If you answer no to that question and die of an illegal drug overdose within two years , there is a contestable clause . The insurance company will likely investigate to see if you failed to answer that question accurately . If they determine that you lied on the application they do not have to pay the claim , they will simply refund any premiums paid .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
No , you do not need to have your own insurance on the car you are driving . However , you DO need to be at least listed as a driver . Just like it 's illegal to drive without a license or permit - it is also illegal to drive a vehicle without insurance ! If you own your vehicle I can provide some free quotes at : www.PaInsuranceMadeEasy.com
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Pay Medical Bills ?
The great thing about life insurance is that the beneficiary receives the money proceeds tax free and can spend them on anything they wish including medical bills . If you purchase a cash value life insurance plan such as whole life insurance or universal life insurance , you can borrow from your cash value tax free and use the money for medical bills or anything else you desire . You may also purchase a rider on most all types of life insurance plans that can give you proceeds to be used in case of a critical illness and that money can also be used for mounting medical bills . So , the simple answer to your question would be yes , you can use life insurance to pay medical bills if you so desire .
Unless one has life insurance with `` living benefits '' , the death benefit is paid out upon the death of the insured person , and the beneficiary may use the life insurance proceeds as they wish . They might use it to pay medical bills , burial expenses , to pay off a mortgage , or invest it for future needs . Life insurance with living benefits allows the insured person to use some of the money that would normally have been paid out at his/her death , to use while he/she is still alive , under some circumstances . If the policy includes a benefit for critical illness , this can be used to pay medical bills for some critical illnesses such as heart attack or certain types of cancer . A chronic illness living benefit provides cash for expenses incurred when unable to do two or more ADL 's .
I will be dating myself by saying this , but life insurance is the silly putty of financial products . It can do just about anything . So yes , if you have cash value life insurance you can use the funds for a medical bill that has come to you unexpectedly . You can use your cash values for any purpose you choose , which is a blessing and a curse . The blessing is you can use the cash values for any emergency . The curse is what you define as an emergency .
Supplemental insurance can be a safety net for out-of-pocket expenses that major medical does n't cover . Major medical plans are designed to pay doctor and hospital bills , supplemental insurance is paid directly to the policyholder to cover everyday living expenses such as car payments , mortgages , and utility bills . For example : imagine a policyholderbreaks their leg . Major medical pays for the doctor and hospital bill , but this person is out of work for the next 6 weeks . Paying the everyday bills gets rough when someone is out of work , and this is where a supplemental policy comes into play . Benefits are paid directly to the policyholder regardless of any other insurance that the policyholder may have , to be used in whatever way they see fit .
The great thing about life insurance is that the beneficiary receives the money proceeds tax free and can spend them on anything they wish including medical bills . If you purchase a cash value life insurance plan such as whole life insurance or universal life insurance , you can borrow from your cash value tax free and use the money for medical bills or anything else you desire . You may also purchase a rider on most all types of life insurance plans that can give you proceeds to be used in case of a critical illness and that money can also be used for mounting medical bills . So , the simple answer to your question would be yes , you can use life insurance to pay medical bills if you so desire .
Absolutely ! Critical illness insurance is paid in lump sum payments from anywhere between 10 and 500 thousand dollars . While most medical plans cover hospital and medical expenses , it does not cover things such as medical co-pays , transportation to treatment centers , bills , etc. . The lump sum payment allows a person to use the money where its needed most , whether its for medical bills or regular bills . About 20 major illnesses are covered and its perfect for high-risk jobs , non-working spouses and the self-employed -LRB- all people who might have a hard time getting disability insurance -RRB- .
An Auto policy on the st page should have what is called your declarations page . This will have on it Bodily injury liability limits example would $ 25,000 per person / $ 50,000 -LRB- this is medical bills they pay to others -RRB- Then it should have Property damage example $ 10,000 -LRB- this is the coverage to the cars or fence or tree or what ever you cause damage to other then medical bills -RRB- Then there is a section that you should have that is Uninsured and underinsured This should be matching limits to your liability limits listed above . This if for you if you get hit by someone that has no insurance or has insurance but there limits are not high enough to pay all your medical bills that you got from the accident then there is medical pay usually this is 5,000 this is for you also incase you are hurt on near or around your vehicle it also is used for funeral bills incase you die in your car you loved ones can use this to help with the funeral expense then If you have what some call `` Full '' coverage this would be the deductible part . Comprehensive or other then collision coverage less your deductible then there is collision . In Montana we do not have what some state have which is call PIP which is personal injury protection .
Dave Ramsey does not think you should buy cancer insurance or any type of specific dread disease insurance . He confuses the purpose of it with major medical health insurance . Your major medical pays your doctor bills -LRB- minus your deductibles , co-pays and premiums . -RRB- Your cancer insurance pays a lump sum amount directly to you . You can use this while you are off work with cancer to pay for food , house payment , medical bills or anything else you need . Dave Ramsey is not a good resource for insurance information .
If there is a medical `` need '' at the time of service , any person will be treated by hospital services . So care in the case of immediate need is not in question . The next part , the paying the bill part , could go in two directions . First , most hospitals will waive -LRB- write off -RRB- the costs if the person does n't have the financial means to pay the bill . The other , if the person `` has '' the means to pay and has chosen not to carry health insurance will be treated the same way as any other bill this person incurs . Which can mean collections . The choice is the medical providers to make .
Disability Insurance pays medical bills only if you want it to pay medical bills . Disability Insurance pays you cash if you become disabled . This cash is a % of your normal salary . You are able to use that income to pay any bills or use any way that you desire .
The best time to buy Medigap -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- right when you activate your Medicare Part B insurance . When you start Part B , it opens a 6-month initial open enrollment period to apply for any Medigap plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . If you do n't secure a Medigap plan during this period and later you decide you want one , you will be subject to medical underwriting unless you qualify for a guaranteed issue right . So why get one?Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Why buy private health insurance ? Well , honestly for a while longer you do n't have to if you do n't want to . The choice to insure has been a personal one in this country for some time . If you did not wish to have coverage , you did n't have to carry any . But here 's the rub to deciding not to have health insurance . If you have a medical need and the means to come close to paying the BILL that comes along with treating the need , the BILL will be treated as any other BILL a person receives in their lifetime . That is , if you decide not to pay it and you have assets or the means to pay it , the hospital or doctor will act just like any other entity out there and send you to collections for recovery . The people Hospitals and Doctors `` write off '' do not have the means to pay for a premium . They have nothing of value . So yes , they do get their care without charges . If you have the means to pay and do n't , a hospital or Doctor will not treat you the same way . Besides all insurance does is cover for risk you do not want to self insure for . You can either pay for an insurance policy or pay out of your assets , entirely for now , your choice .
That is a great question ! You really want to be careful though , as long term disability and health insurance are two completely different animals . Health insurance can only be applied to your medical expenses , and insures your health . Disability insurance insures your paycheck . As such , the money it provides can be used for whatever need you have , rent , electric bill , medical bills , etc. . Could you use your LTD money to help pay for medical bills ? Absolutely . Would it replace your health insurance ? No , and I really would n't advise that you try , as your LTD payments will not be close to what your health insurance would pay , in most cases . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Anyone 65 or older on Medicare who wants to create a very predictable healthcare expense structure where they do n't leave themselves exposed to many costs and high hospital/doctor bills should buy a Medigap plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
Health insurance is important because it is the way we finance health care . Health care is expensive with office visits , lab tests , x-rays , and surgery whether inpatient or outpatient . Most people do not have money saved up for medical expenses and therefore purchase health insurance to help pay for medical care . 80 % of Americans spend less than $ 900 annually on medical care and if you are young and healthy you may not think you need health insurance . Health insurance also protects us against large and unexpected medical expenses . The large health care expenses young adults have are usually caused by outdoor activities and sports where injuries can create high medical bills . Those are the main reasons why young adults should purchase health insurance to protect against larger unexpected medical bills .
Will health insurance pay for old bills ? It 's going to depend on how old ? Normally a insurance company allows anywhere from 6-12 months for a bill to be submitted and they will pay . Beyond that , they are no longer obligated to make a payment . If your medical provider has a problem with outgoing billing that they ca n't bill within a reasonable amount of time after your visit , it may be time to switch providers .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans cover the gaps in cost that Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- does not cover . Medicare Part A & Part B only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap Plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- all or a portion of that other 20 % , depending on which Medigap plan you have -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it limits the expenses a senior can be exposed to by creating a very predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Not unless your lender requires it or allows it . Contact your lender and inquire about an escrow account . You may already have an escrow account for taxes . If so , see if the property insurance can be added . Most likely you will have to add the property insurance at the renewal date of the policy after you pay the annual premium in full . Then your lender adds ther escrow additional to your billing every month until next policy renewal when they have collected 1/12 of the estimated premium from you each month and can pay your policy for you . Make sure you get copies of all documents relating to this action and your homeowners carrier changes your billing method to ` escrow bill ' , they have the correct address of the escrow disbursement entity , and the correct account number of your loan to reference their bill to the escrow disbursement entity . Follow up to make sure your carrier bills your escrow company and the bill is paid . Do not wait for a notice of cancellation for non-payment of your policy to be issued . Be pro-active with all of your insurance policies and always get it in writing - especially anything you sign . If someone tells you over the telephone `` OK , we will take care of that for you ... '' , tell them to send you a confirmation -LRB- or binder -RRB- in writing with a signature .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Go To Emergency Room Without Health Insurance ?
Anyone can go to the ER -LRB- emergency room -RRB- regardless of whether you have health insurance or not . Bear in mind the ER is not required to treat you -LRB- except in the case of life threatening medical conditions -RRB- unless you have the ability to pay your bill . EMTALA rules require hospitals to treat medical emergencies without first verifying if you have insurance or not .
Of course , you can go anywhere without health insurance . The question is `` What will they do with you when you show up in their ER ? '' If you arrive with a serious injury or presenting symptoms of a serious injury or medical event -LRB- like a heart attack -RRB- they are required to treat you . Showing up at the emergency room for a medical issue that is minor in nature and should be handled by a primary care physician , dentist or urgent/minor care center is another matter entirely and is one of the biggest problems and wastes of resources faced by ER departments . Any ER is going to engage in triage -LRB- determining who has the most serious problem and requires immediate attention versus persons with less pressing needs -RRB- and may direct you away or tell you to be prepared for a very long wait if your issue is minor . Your low grade fever and congestion may feel like an emergency to you but it pales in comparison to the person suffering from multiple traumas from an auto accident that is being wheeled in . In any event , the most expensive medical care you will ever receive is in the hospital 's emergency room . Yes , you can go without health insurance and in a situation of real need that is exactly what you should do . Just be prepared for a big bill when you do .
Yes . Now , how it is covered can vary significantly from one insurance carrier to another and even within the various health insurance plan options a specific health insurance carrier offers . So , your coverage for an Urgent Care visit can range all the way from a simple copayment to being subject to your plan 's deductible and coinsurance requirements depending upon the plan you are enrolled in . Urgent Care is for those situations such as minor injuries or sudden onsets of mild illnesses that do n't justify the use of a hospital emergency room but require timely attention that ca n't be provided by your primary care physician -LRB- weekends , doctor is all booked up that day , etc. -RRB- . Services delivered in an Urgent Care setting are usually far less expensive than the same treatment received in an emergency room so most health plan designs are set up to encourage their members to use an Urgent Care/Minor Medical delivery site as opposed to going to the emergency room .
Does health insurance cover urgent care ? In most cases yes , but it will depend on the plan you have . Some plans cover urgent care very well to encourage it 's use over emergency room care . Urgent care was created to help reduce the excessive cost of people using emergency rooms for non emergency situations . More than likely your health plan provides favorable plan design for the use of urgent care .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
Medigap Plan N is one of ten standardized plans offers coverage in addition to the standard benefits provided by other Medicare Supplement plans . It is most simiiar to Medigap Plan D , with two major exceptions . With N , you are responsible for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do n't result in inpatient admission before your Part B coverage being paying expenses at 100 % . Basic benefits offered by Plan N include : Medicare Part A hospital coinsurance and other costs up to an additional 365 days after Original Medicare benefits are exhausted Medicare Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayments -LRB- except for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do not result in inpatient care -RRB- First three pints of blood used in a medical procedure Plan N also offers the following additional benefits : Skilled Nursing Facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign travel emergency care -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- When available , many consumers find they can save $ 50 per month or more when compared to the more popular Plan F . If your doctor accepts Medicare assignment as payment in full , and you do not see your physician more than twice per month , Plan N can be a great way to lower your overall health care expenses .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Of course it is safe to go without health insurance , just like it is safe to drive without a spare tire until you have a flat . Then it becomes a problem . If you are a multi-millionaire and can pay for whatever foreseeable accident or illness that might befall you then you probably do n't `` need '' health insurance . If you are like most Americans then you might not have a pile of money stashed away for an unexpected illness or injury and that is why you have health insurance . This is the kind of bad judgment call that can seriously mess up your financial life and perhaps life in general . Just taking a good fall from your bicycle and needing some orthopedic surgery can cost tens of thousands of dollars -LRB- I recently had a friend have such an experience -RRB- , a normal child birth will probably put you back $ 7000 to $ 10,000 , and would you like that new cure for Hepatitis C ? A bargain at over $ 80,000 for that round of treatment . You may say , I 'll just go to the emergency room at our local public hospital and they 'll treat me and then write it off . Do n't count on it , those days are pretty much over unless you are really , truly poor -LRB- in which case you should be enrolled in Medicaid -RRB- . But with the financial losses and reductions in reimbursement levels that hospitals are contending with these days I can assure you that they will turn you over to collections in an effort to get the money you owe them .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
For emergency room visits for medially approved conditions , when the patient is treated and released , ER costs are covered by Medicare Part B -LRB- medical insurance -RRB- . The patient is responsible to pay the co-payment of the emergency room charge plus the co-pay for each specific service received -LRB- such as X-Rays or EKG -RRB- .
Yes you can . The question is , do you know what 's going to happen tomorrow?That is what insurance is for , to protect you and your family 's tomorrow . If you break an arm or leg and go to the emergency room , without insurance how would you pay the bill ? Just makes sense to have coverage .
PCP stands for primary care physician . This is typically a general practitioner you see for medical issues first , unless you go to a hospital 's emergency room for an emergency . Depending on the plan type you have , you may need to see your primary care physician first before you can see a specialist - the carrier would likely require a referral form to cover the visit to the specialist , otherwise you may be subject to paying the entire visit yourself out of pocket .
Just like any other insurance , it 's meant to cover you when an unexpected event causes financial loss . But , unlike most insurance , health insurance is now structured to cover expected events along with the unexpected events . For example , set co-payments for routine health exams and maintenance , and set emergency room costs , before you meet your deductible and the insurance kicks in . But overall , the point of health insurance these days , is to provide you with better access to higher quality of health care providers ; which in turn leads to better health maintenance and prevention , and overall reducing your future costs of healthcare throughout your life . With health care costs continuing to climb due to our greatly aging and sickening society , it is important to have the best and most access to prevention and early detection of health risks , to reduce future health care spending as a whole .
Anyone can go to the ER -LRB- emergency room -RRB- regardless of whether you have health insurance or not . Bear in mind the ER is not required to treat you -LRB- except in the case of life threatening medical conditions -RRB- unless you have the ability to pay your bill . EMTALA rules require hospitals to treat medical emergencies without first verifying if you have insurance or not .
There is one major difference from plan D and N. Plan N has a $ 20 Copay when you go to the doctors office and a $ 50 Copay when you go to the emergency room . Plan N would be better suited for someone that has more office visits in a year .
Most health insurance plans give some coverage overseas . The extent of the coverage in most cases is determined by looking at the event as life threatening.If that is the case , then emergency room visits would be covered.What is important for the traveler to know is that most doctors and hospitals in foreign countries want payment up front for services at the time of the visit . One instance I know of that happened to a traveler in Panama was a traveler went to the hospital and was required to pay $ 5,000 up front as a deposit before they would treat them . The traveler has to file claims after the fact and wait for a reimbursement . If you are covered by Medicaid or Medicare , there is no coverage outside the U.S. except Medicare will cover emergencies in Canada if they happen while en route to Alaska . When traveling outside the U.S. and on cruises the best course of action is to purchase a medical policy specifically for coverage overseas . These policies are very economical and offer an array of terms and choices . One of the most important services is to have a multilingual customer service agent who can help you locate medical services , deal with currency exchanges , manage claims and can co-ordinate services 24/7 . There are many companies that provide these insurance policies . I represent International Medical Group -LRB- IMG -RRB- who has many choices for nationals and foreign nationals that travel globally for business or pleasure . They have been in business for over twenty years and concentrate solely on this market . The United States Consular Bureau of Affairs also has a list of companies that provide these policies .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover House Shifting ?
Good question Usally earth movement is not covered on the home insurance . This is an excluded coverage and you might have to buy lets say earthquate insurance to cover that risk . Also if you live on a cliff or mountian and the soil gives way and the hosue shift or drops off the cliff you will not be covered . Good Luck
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , the answer probably is not . As a rule , most houses will settle slightly , but not enough to cause major damage , so it typically is n't a named coverage . In places where landslides or earthquakes are a risk , then those dangers get coverage either as riders added to your policy , or as separate policies altogether . About the best thing that I can tell you is to contact your agent , and have them tell you whether you are covered or not . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
No . Homeowners insurance will not cover ground movement , shifting or sink holes . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses and shifting occurs over time . This condition is also specifically excluded in most policies . Shifting can become a major problem so I would recommend hiring a structural engineer to assess the situation and provide recommendations to fix the problem .
The damage that is caused by earth movement is not covered under the basic homeowners plan . If the issue is the gradual settling that a new home invariably experiences , that isnt covered either . There are many earth movement issues in addition to earthquake . There are earth subsidence issues , sink hole issues and mine collapse . These are generally excluded risks .
No . Homeowners insurance will not cover ground movement , shifting or sink holes . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses and shifting occurs over time . This condition is also specifically excluded in most policies . Shifting can become a major problem so I would recommend hiring a structural engineer to assess the situation and provide recommendations to fix the problem .
If your foundation is damaged by a covered peril , then it would be taken care of by the home insurance -LRB- so if a house fire causes damage to your foundation you would be fine -RRB- since the foundation is part of the house . However , home insurance policies exclude damage by flood and hydrostatic pressure , so if your `` foundation problems '' are due to the pressure of water , or shifting ground there would not be coverage . If the concrete is simply no good , that is also excluded since it is caused by a slow degradation , not a sudden and accidental occurence . It 's hard to answer your question without more info . Send me a message and we can address it specifically .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
Health insurance rates are rising and will be continuing to rise for several reasons ; 1 -RRB- Healthcare costs are rising -LRB- physician services , prescription drugs , inpatient services -RRB- 2 -RRB- An aging population - the Baby Boom generation , the largest demographic segment of our population , have now aged to the point where they are in the prime years of life -LRB- age 40 + -RRB- that health problems begin to become common . 3 -RRB- Increased consumption of health care services in general - across the board , the American population in general is consuming more and a broader array of health care services than past generations . 4 -RRB- New treatments - from expensive new prescription drugs to new forms of technology like robotic surgery we have a wide range of advances in medical science that allow for the treatment of conditions that in the past there were little or no options available . Few of these new advances are cheap . 5 -RRB- New Conditions - from Autisim , to Celiac Sprue Disease to a variety of other conditions , we can diagnose and treat a range of conditions that were n't even recognized as existing in previous decades . 6 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover the Cost of Treating the Uninsured - the cost of providing care for the uninsured who can not pay their own medical bills is shifted over to higher costs for people who are insured . 7 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover Government Underpayment for Medicaid and Medicare - since the inception of these government programs in the 1960 's they have never paid the market rate for health care services and in many situations they pay less than the cost of the services these populations consume . This cost difference has also been shifted over to the insured population . 8 -RRB- Government Intervention in the Health Insurance System - with the passage of the Affordable Care Act and the many changes it imposes on health insurance benefits and the financing of health insurance such as doing away with pre-existing condition limitations & exclusions , making policies guaranteed to be issued regardless of health condition , mandating a broad new range of services be covered by all health insurance policies -LRB- for example all policies must cover maternity and pediatric dental and vision services even if you are a 50 year old single male -RRB- , providing subsidies for the purchase of heath insurance up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level and expanding Medicaid eligibility in many states are all factors that will contribute to increased demand for a finite resource . Regardless of one 's political or philosophical views of these changes , basic economics teaches us that higher demand for something for which there is a limited supply leads to higher prices . There are more factors that contribute to the ever increasing cost of health insurance but these are among the main driving forces behind the steady increase in health insurance rates people have been experiencing .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Yes ! One of the primary points of getting life insurance after getting married is for income protection purposes so your spouse can maintain the same lifestyle for a given amount of time without having to worry about financial matters . When a family loses an income stream due to the death of a spouse , the surviving spouse often has to make a dramatic shift in lifestyle choices with no way to have that income immediately replaced - this can be everything from losing your house because the income is not there to pay the mortgage , to pay off the car loans , credit card debts -LRB- which can increase rapidly in this case as it 's a quick source for people to delay paying immediate bills , but draws substantially large interest rate charges and can put that person into even bigger debt -RRB- . This is where life insurance comes in . Instead of using 100 % of your own money , you use someone else 's -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- so your spouse does n't have to worry about financial matters so heavily right after the death of a loved one . For income replacement purposes , you ideally want to have at least a 5-7x income value so if you are making $ 100,000 per year , you want to have at least $ 500,000 - $ 700,000 of coverage for that type of purpose . As noted earlier , you would then add in other debts you do n't want your spouse to have to worry about such as mortgage , cars , credit cards , etc. . Term insurance works great for taking care of the mortgage and other temporary expenses because you may only need coverage for those items for a specified number of years -LRB- e.g. 20 year or 30 years -RRB- . A great idea for people is to create a step-down process where you have a larger amount of coverage in the immediate and a lower amount in later years when the larger amount of coverage may not be needed at that future point . This can help reduce costs for coverage and use the savings in premiums towards other avenues such as retirement planning , investments , savings , etc. . If you would like to go over this information in further detail , discuss your life insurance needs , and any other questions you may have , please feel free contact me by clicking on the button next to my picture and I will be happy to help . I do not charge any fees for my services and my group is licensed with over 50 insurance companies to compare rates through . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much for your question .
-- > Normal 0 All homeowners policies will cover your home and personal property should it be damaged but the type of damage you are covered for is defined in two general types of insuring agreements . One type -LRB- Named Peril -RRB- will tell you what specific types of damage you are covered for . The policies will actually name them ; fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , vandalism , etc. . For damage to be covered , you have to prove to the insurance company that the damage you sustained was caused by one of these named perils . The second type of insuring agreement -LRB- often referred to as all-risk -RRB- covers you for any direct damage unless the policy specifically excludes or limits it . Under this form of insurance , any damage is covered unless the insurance company can prove a specific exclusion or limitation applies . The burden of proof shifts from you proving you are covered under a Named Peril policy to the insurance company proving you are not covered under an All-Risk type policy . A small difference which means a lot should you have a claim . The term all-risk isnt used too much anymore ; this type of policy is often referred to as Special Form or Open Peril policies . Whatever you want to call them , this is the type of insuring agreement you should look for . Most of us are not prepared to prove anything to an insurance company . Its also much easier to understand what you are not covered for simply by reading the exclusions and limitations .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
The section of the policy that will likely answer the question the best will be found in the `` Exclusions '' . In the ISO Homeowner Form 3 -LRB- HO3 -RRB- policy , emulated by most insurers if not used directly , and the most common form of homeowner insurance issued in the USA , is the form I take this information from . It says : Collapse , Settling , subsidence , earth movement -LRB- unless endorsed otherwise -RRB- , landslide , mudslide , mudflow , sinkhole , or any other impact of the earth sinking , rising or shifting that impact the foundation structure , walls , footings or floor are specifically excluded . An exception is made for the impact of losses caused by fire but only to the extent caused by the fire . In other words , if a fire ensues and the building eventually collapses , it is covered to the extent the damage was caused due to the damage of fire . There are certainly regional exceptions . In Ohio , due to past mining activity , subsidence has to be offered in various counties -LRB- but does not need to be purchased -RRB- . Florida has a problem with sinkholes and may have state mandated coverage changes . California has issues with earthquake and almost certainly requires at least the offer of earthquake insurance . Check with your local insurance representative for the advice that fits your particular locality .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
You can not save for retirement without shifting some of your current income into savings . Many equate retirement planning with stock picking . In reality it is all about asset shifting . Participate in your employer sponsored retirement program , if available . If there are any programs that match your contributions save the maximum amount that will be matched . Then start a maximum contribution IRA if you are less than 40 years old . If you are over 50 start a maximum contribution Roth IRA . Denying yourself a little now is much better than having to deny yourself much when you retire .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
That depends upon two things really . First , the type of housing you are in and second the terms and conditoins of your parents ' Homeowners Insurance policy . Let 's talk about the second one first . If your Insurance Professional advises you that your parents ' Homeowners ' policy provides extended coverage that is adiquate to cover your personal belongings in an on campus dorm , then in that case , it is not critical that you obtain a separate renters insurance policy . If the Homeowners policy does not provide this extension or , more commonly , if you are housed in off campus rental unit or house , then obtaining a renters insurance policy would not only be smart , it may also be required by the buildng owner or management company from whom you are renting .
Mortality in the United States stubbornly remains at 100 % . If you want to purchase a life insurance policy in anticipation of receiving a death benefit , then a permanent policy is your sole option . All other policies have a termination date . I am using the term permanent because it includes other policies that share these features with a whole life policy . Death is not the only opportunity for receiving benefits from a permanent life insurance policy . Throughout the existence of the policy you have access to the cash value of the policy . You can either withdraw money or take a policy loan . A policy loan does not require an application and can be taken in total privacy . These loans have assisted business owners through stressful period of time , by providing capital to keep the business afloat . Business owners often use permanent life insurance to make sure that funds are available for surviving partners to purchase the interest of a deceased partner in a business . They also use permanent life insurance in compensation packages . Some people use their permanent life insurance policy in their estate plan to pay taxes and to make sure heirs receive equal treatment . It is an excellent way to give a gift to a university or religious organization . The systematic nature of deposits in a permanent life insurance policy has enabled some people to develop significant wealth . It certainly can form the stable component of an overall financial strategy . The return in a permanent life insurance policy is competitive with other high-quality , fixed return assets and can provide tax free distributions as well as income tax free death benefits . Financial planning is about shifting assets . The most important shift is from current consumption to future consumption . You can make a choice between a low-fat caramel macchiato and money in your future . While certain coffee franchise would take offense that is really be beginning of the process . How much are you willing to invest in your future ? Because of its semi-compulsory nature , a permanent life insurance policy is a great place to start . I havent met anyone yet who honestly told me that they have too much permanent life insurance . Usually they are lamenting the escalating cost of their term life insurance . Today a significant amount of life insurance is purchased by people over age 60 . Can you imagine how they would have preferred to have made that purchase thirty years ago for the cost of a stop at the coffee shop ? Whole life insurance is the fully guaranteed permanent life insurance product . It is the basic policy from which all other forms of life insurance have been developed . Some will hold that whole life insurance is too expensive . However , if you are looking for a lifetime of coverage you will find it is very inexpensive unless you are wildly successful investor . If you look at the sum of premiums alone you will find that by life expectancy that term life insurance will have cost a significantly greater amount of money than the whole life .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How To Save A Lot Of Money For Retirement ?
Be frugal , try not to waste too much of your money on unnecessary things , buy what you can comfortably afford , pay off your credit cards and all of your other bills in full every month , put money away , and invest wisely . Time is a great friend for you because of the power of compounding interest . If you start saving money at a younger age , it can grow much more money in interest over those extra years and yield more money for you in your retirement years . It can be helpful to consult with a financial planner that can help guide you on managing your monies wisely . I would also recommend reading some books and articles that provide valuable tips on saving for retirement - there are a number of good ones out there . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
As soon as possible , the greatest asset you have is time , and it takes time for money to build . If you add earning a rate of return on your money and have that money compound over the years than your money can grow to a huge lump sum . What you want to do is find the right savings vehicle that will give you the best return . How about a tax free retirement ? Are you familiar with tax deferred ? How about avoiding penalties if you take an early withdrawal . There are many things to consider but the earlier you start the greater chance you have of saving a lot of money for retirement .
What retirement plan is right for you ? The right plan for you is going to be the one `` you '' actually do . Waiting around for perfect or the plan , simply wastes time . Wasting time is the biggest downfall for most people when it comes to retirements . Personally I do n't care if it 's a passbook savings account or a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or anything , if you fail to do anything , you simply wo n't have anything . There are many options both qualified and non qualified out there to choose from . Read up and pick one that works for you and that you WILL fund . In my profession I 've seen agents make fun of little old ladies with a couple hundred thousand in a savings account . They would comment on how stupid these ladies were ... Me ? I thought they were smart . Yea , sure lots of different things they could have done , but they saved and they saved some more . They had something because they saved something . It 's the habit of saving rather than the plan . Lots of people have `` plans '' with no money in them .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How much you need to save for retirement by the time you are 40 depends of course on your desired retirement lifestyle and the amount needed to fund it . Without those details , I unable to offer you an opinion . There are online calculators available of course . However , here is a retirement worksheet to help you understand the process . I have used 6 % for illustration purposes only , it could be higher or lower and is only to give you a point of reference . Age 65 was used as the retirement age -LRB- 25 years in the future -RRB- , Again . this is for information purposes only . 1 . Annual retirement income which must be provided by savings $ _____ 2 . Amount you must save to generate income $ _____ -LRB- line 1 . X 11.55 -RRB- 3 . Amount you have already saved $ _____ 4 . Amount these savings will have grown $ _____ by the time you retire -LRB- line 3 X 4.2919 -RRB- 5 . Amount of savings still needed $ _____ -LRB- line 4 minus line 2 -RRB- 6 . Amount you need to save each year $ _____ -LRB- line 5 X .01720 -RRB- If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
To start planning for retirement , you should begin to think of how you will generate the income that you have now once you are in retirement . To do this , you simply determine what amount of money will be needed when you retire to generate the income that you now earn . You can then calculate the amount of money you will need to save accumulate this sum of money by the time you wish to retire . There are other quicker rules of thumb like saving 15 % of your income , but you should be careful not to fall into a false sense of security about how well retirement will work out simply by savings a certain amount determined by a broad rule of thumb .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
What are the best ways to save for retirement ? Well , when I see this question and I do see it a lot I sort of answer it this way . The best ways to save for retirement is to get into the habit of saving for retirement . There are many ways to save for retirement , there is no best way , there are ways that work best for you , but again the big thing is to do it .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Pulmonary Rehab ?
If you have a referral from your doctor , Medicare will cover a comprehensive pulmonary rehabilitation program for moderate to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease -LRB- COPD -RRB- . The rehab may occur in a doctor 's office or a hospital outpatient setting that offers such programs . If you get the services in a doctor 's office you pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount . If as a hospital outpatient , you pay a copay for each session . You also pay the Part B deductible .
If you have a referral from your doctor , Medicare will cover a comprehensive pulmonary rehabilitation program for moderate to very severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease -LRB- COPD -RRB- . The rehab may occur in a doctor 's office or a hospital outpatient setting that offers such programs . If you get the services in a doctor 's office you pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount . If as a hospital outpatient , you pay a copay for each session . You also pay the Part B deductible .
COPD stands for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . It manifests itself in chronic bronchitis , emphysema , or -LRB- most commonly -RRB- a combination of the two . Most COPD is caused by a history of smoking and is progressive in nature . When applying for life insurance , underwriters will look at pulmonary function , whether or not the patient is still smoking , severity and frequency of symptoms , and whether portable oxygen is used . Very mild COPD may qualify for medically underwritten coverage . Generally , simplified issue policies must be used for persons with moderate to severe COPD . If oxygen is used , the applicant will most likely need to purchase guaranteed issue life insurance , if it is available at their age .
Your Medicare Part B will cover a comprehensive pulmonary rehabilitation program if you have moderate to very severe COPD and have a referral from the doctor treating you for the disease . You will have to pay 20 % of the Medicare-approved amount and/or copayments depending upon where the service is performed .
Rehab for the first 20 days after a qualifying hospital stay is usually covered by Medicare . Then on a sliding scale of cost to the patient , Medicare can help fund rehab provided for up to an additional 80 days . If the patient needing rehab has a long term care insurance policy , the policy may help pay for rehabilitation services after the elimination period is satisfied . These rehabilitation services may be provided in the home or other living arrangements besides skilled nursing facilities , with some long term care insurance policies . Individual policy provisions will determine what is covered .
Another way to think about this question is , `` How much woulda disabling event cost you without coverage ? '' Considering Brandon 's well-thought out response to you , also thinking about the question from the darker side makes many of us uneasy inside though . -LSB- I do n't like to think something like that can happen , but it does . -RSB- From personal experience , I can tell you that disability insurance and critical illness insurance has a very real place in anyone 's planning who has a paycheck and depends on that paycheck for their living . Period . I am now 42 years old and at the age of 27 I delivered a very healthy baby girl - went home from the hospital after 4 days like normaland on the 5th day had a pulmonary embolism that locked up both of my lungs almost to the point of death . So instead of being gone from my job for 8 weeks on maternity leave , I was gone for almost 5 months . Without my DI and CI policies , it would have been a financially crippling event for my family . It was not expected - but it unfortunately happened . Brandon shared some very realistic numbers here for consideration . I applaud anyone looking into these ancillary policies to protect their planning . Sheryl Brown / @AshBrokerage
Yes Medicare does pay for Medically necessary knee replacement . If all you have is original Medicare you will be responsible for your Part A Hospital deductible and possibly some Part B Medical expenses . If you must do rehab in a nursing facility , the first 20 days will be paid at 100 % . Some rehab done at home may also be paid for .
Overweight people can be underwritten for life insurance . Prudential is a leader in this area . The real issue with overweight prospects is usually additional impairments like diabetes , heart conditions , pulmonary problems or persons who also smoke .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare would pay 80 % for this treatment if it is considered a chronic condition such as COPD , if not there is a good chance this would not be covered . You should confirm with your doctor that this is medically necessary before you get this type of rehab or you could get a bill from the rehab when Medicare declines payment .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance.It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers an inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility -LRB- rehab -RRB- , hospice and some health care . Medicare pays all cost for the first 20 days in a skilled nursing facility and for days 21-100 there is a co-pay of $ 157.50 per day . Medicare will only let you stay in a skilled nursing facility for up to 100 days . Medicare does not cover long term care . Under Part A , Medicare has a deductible of $ 1,260 for an inpatient hospital stay .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
Medicare Part A will cover blood tests done as an inpatient in a hospital or skilled nursing or rehab facility , and Part B will cover blood tests done as an outpatient in any setting , when the blood tests are ordered to diagnose or monitor a condition or disease . Medicare Part A and B does not ordinarily cover routine blood screening . However , some preventative screenings have recently been added to the blood tests that are covered under Medicare part B : diabetes screening for those who are high risk for diabetes , one blood test every 5 years to test cholesterol , HIV tests for those who are high risk or pregnant , and prostate cancer screening yearly . For specifics see this brochure : WEBSITELINK
No , Medicare is very limited on home health care services . Medicare does not cover custodial care either at home or in a facility . Medicare will cover some rehab services at home performed by approved skilled therapists or nurses . the will not pay for home health aids . You would either have to private pay or qualify for Medicaid to receive this type of assistance .
For most individuals , Medicare Part A will be premium-free . This happens if you 're turning 65 and you 've hit your 40 credits -LRB- earned through working life/paying FICA taxes -RRB- . If you do n't hit this , the premium will be up to $ 426 per month . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A under other means -LRB- e.g. you 're under 65 and receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months or you have end-stage renal disease -RRB- . Medicare Part A , in short , is your hospital insurance - Part B is your physician insurance . Part A provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . You 're generally responsible for about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred during these visits - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Slip And Fall ?
You renters policy has an entire section devoted to liability insurance . It states that the company will pay any sum that you are legally liable for . If someone other than a resident of the home is injured on your premises , your company will act on your behalf . These claims can be a minor inconvenience to a major headache and are actually the best reason to have a renters policy .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
Always . And the landlord should request evidence of the existence of the renters insurance . Reason number one : Under the personal liability coverage of a renters policy the carrier agrees to pay the sums the insured is legally liable for as a result of bodily injury or property damage . What type of occurrencescould be involved ? A guest in the renter 's apartment slips on a wet bathroom floor , falls , and is injured . This is bodily injury . The tenant leaves a pan of oil on the stove unattended and a fire results damaging the building . This is property damage . Reason number two : Unless legally liable , the landlord is not responsible for the tenant 's business or personal property -LRB- for things like fire , theft , mysterious disappearance , etc -RRB- The tenant should cover their own property with insurance like a renters policy .
Since this question is asked of renters insurance and a renter does not own the dwelling nor the pool that comes with it I must assume this is a liability question . If a tenant is for example having friends over and someone slips and falls or worst case drowns in the pool there is a highprobabilitythe tenant will be sued . In this case the renters insurance liability portion of the policy will have to defend . If for some reason the tenant caused some type ofdamageto the pool itself -LRB- property damage -RRB- and the landlord wants to sue the tenant for damages at the very least the liability portion of the renterspolicymust still defend .
Depending on what type of accident yes it would be covered , If you had a slip and fall situation that would fall under the home owners policy but if you are talking about your car backed into the garage or another car then your auto policy would cover that liability.Also the accident if it was yourself that fell that would fall under a different portion of your home owners policy.I recommend you call your agent or your carrier with the details
Renter insurance makes a lot of sense . If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle . Yes it makes sense to buy renters insurance .
Homeowners insurance really does not go up with a pool although some carriers may have a small surcharge . What you want to look at however is liability coverage . You may want to increase your liability limits since your liability exposure increases with a pool . Such as a slip and fall or worse . A pool itself will fall under your other structure coverage . I suggest to consult your agent to see if you have enough coverage . Usually the pool is less likely to suffer damages , however your pumps and filters , heater you would want to make sure are covered .
Mark has given you a factual answer but let me give you a personal answer . A renters policy costs less than the loss you might suffer should your property be damaged as a result of a covered loss -LRB- fire , wind etc. -RRB- Insurance isnt a tax but sharing of a risk . Unless you can buy everything in your unit today out of your checking account , having a renters policy makes great sense . The real reason to have a renters policy is to defend you should you be sued for bodily injury or property damage . Anyone entering the property could sue you if they slip and fall or your pet decides to taste their leg . These are really serious issues and the expense can be enormous . Few of us can sustain that type of claim . While Mark mentioned a $ 100,000 liability limit , let me suggest that you take the highest limit that your insurance company offers . Let them take the risk , the premium is insignificant in comparison to the risk .
If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle .
A homeowners policy covers a residence , and the personal property of the insured . If the personal property of the insured is away from the residence there is a percentage of the limit that covers the property at another location . A renters policy provides similar protection , except for coverage for the building . If you are thinking of covering a child who has gone away to college and is renting an apartment with your homeowners policy the basic problem will be liability that might arise from the childs occupancy in the rental unit . If someone slips and falls in the apartment there wouldnt be coverage for a lawsuit .
Homeowners Insurance does cover Swimming Pools as ` Other Structures ' which is usually 10 % of the Dwelling Coverage amount on the policy . A swimming pool is covered for the same perils that cover the home . The most common covered claim for a swimming pool would be a liability claim or medical payments claim for a slip and fall injury ; some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board or slide in order to avoid this risk . One of the more common questions regarding a swimming pool is coverage for cracks in the pool . Cracks are usually caused by land movement or earthquakes ; this is not covered on a homeowners policy . Earthquake coverage would need to be purchased to cover this sort of damage to a swimming pool ; however , the deductible and special limits will apply to swimming pools . Please review your coverage details prior to purchasing coverage .
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
There is so much competition for renters insurance that I am surprised by this question . The premium is an accurate reflection of the risk . That means that you have so much to lose should a fire sweep through your residence , or if someone were to slip and fall in your unit . The results could be that without insurance you would be bankrupt and without any personal property .
Normally not . Home Insurance is n't for maintenance expenses , it is for sudden and accidental occurrences for covered perils . So , if it was damaged in a covered peril -LRB- house fire or collapse would be two that might damage sidewalk -RRB- - then yes , it would be covered , but most of the time , sidewalk repair needs come from ground freeze or slow degradation over time . Those would not be claimable with insurance . If you have bad sidewalk , your insurance might require you to replace it so that there is n't a liability claim later -LRB- slip and falls and trip hazards -RRB- .
It is not `` needed '' unless a lender gave you money to buy the house - then it definitely is needed . But even if your home was paid for , if you had a dog -LRB- dog bites -RRB- , have a pool -LRB- slip and falls -RRB- or entertain at home - then you 'd want one to protect you from liability claims of other 's . Plus , not only are your personal belongings covered at home , they are covered when traveling , in your car , at a hotel , on vacation or at a storage place . So it is really a smart consumer idea to keep a homeowner policy in place .
Your key word in your question is `` accident '' . Any type of accidental death is covered by your life insurance policy . Some life insurance policies have a double indemnity clause that pays double the benefit for accidental death . The accident can be hunting , fishing , car wreck , slip and fall or a number of different types of accidents in which one could die . The issues come when an accident appears to be a suicide or homicide . These types of deaths can be investigated by the carrier . You should be safely covered for hunting .
Homeowners Insurance usually includes Personal Liability coverage listed under Section II on the Declarations Page . Personal Liability will usually cover a legal case brought against the insured and direct family members in the insured household due to negligence . It is important to read the coverage definitions , limitations and exclusions to assure that coverage will be afforded for each specific case . If there is a case of a Slip and Fall incident due to the negligence of a covered person , it is likely that coverage exists ; however , this will be determined by the adjustor assigned to the specific case during examination and interpretation of coverage on the said policy . It is never a good idea to assume coverage without the complete legal interpretation of both the policy and the specific case presented .
You need a tenants policy if your landlord requires it . You need one if you would suffer a financial loss if all your property went up in smoke . You need one if you can not pay the expense of a lawsuit if someone slips and falls in your rental unit . You need one if you can not afford temporary housing while your rental unit is being repaired following a covered loss .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Needs Life Insurance The Most ?
The people who need life insurance the most are the survivors . These are those who remain after you die . I assume that you love these people . While they dont need a life insurance policy , they need the money that the life insurance would have brought . They need basic necessities and they need time to recover from the shock of losing you . You dont need life insurance , they do .
Those who need life insurance the most fall in two categories . 1 -RRB- Those who owe somebody . 2 -RRB- Those who love somebody . If you fall in one of those categories you need life insurance . I can not even begin to tell all the stories I have seen of a loved one passing on leaving the rest of the family decimated without income . To me life insurance is one of the true selfless acts of love one could show their family . I recommend every have this discussion with your family and your agent about your need for life insurance .
That is a great question , and one that I am frequently asked . It 's easier to tell you who does n't need life insurance , than it is who does . There is a much smaller group who do n't . If you have a fund set aside that you will not need to touch during your lifetime for your funeral expenses and final debts , along with a funded plan to provide your equivalent yearly income for your survivors , you do n't need life insurance . Since the vast majority of Americans do n't fit that category , life insurance is probably a good idea . The idea behind the insurance is that you do not leave those behind as financially hurt by your passing as they are emotionally . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Many people need life insurance . Studies show that many people know that they need life insurance . People who love someone else need life insurance to ease the pain of a premature death . People who owe money need life insurance to fulfill their obligations . People who are looking to the future need life insurance to protect their ability to obtain coverage . My favorite though , is wives need life insurance . They are so very important in a family and widowers have such a difficult time when they lose their wife .
Life insurance can be used for many purposes : business succession , estate planning , charitable giving , key person coverage , etc. . Because it has so many great features , life insurance works well for many financial endeavors . But those who really need life insurance are those who have people who need them , who they would leave behind . Unless they have been able to save up hundreds of thousands of dollars in a short period of time , most people with spouses and/or children need life insurance .
The people who need life insurance the most are the survivors . These are those who remain after you die . I assume that you love these people . While they dont need a life insurance policy , they need the money that the life insurance would have brought . They need basic necessities and they need time to recover from the shock of losing you . You dont need life insurance , they do .
Those who need the greatest amount of life insurance are those who would have the greatest losses , numerically speaking , if they passed . Persons with very high incomes would need a very high amount of life insurance to replace their income in the event of their deaths . Owners of a highly valued business could purchase a very large policy to buy out the share of another owner who passes . A son could take out life insurance on his father so that he is able to purchase his father 's ranch when his father passes . Of course , needing a great amount of life insurance does not make the need any more important than for those who need lesser amounts . Sometimes $ 10,000 can mean as much to one beneficiary as $ 1,000,000 can mean to another .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Who needs permanent life insurance ? People with permanent needs . I.e. needs that will not end after a certain number of years . No one knows for certain when death will occur , so funeral expenses will need to be covered by permanent life insurance if the goal is to pay off the funeral with life insurance . Leaving an inheritance to children or grandchildren will require permanent life insurance . If you have Term insurance , pass away after it expires , and can not qualify for or afford a new policy , the money you planned to leave your family will be gone . Most people do n't need all their life insurance in permanent policies , because some of their life insurance needs will be temporary . But when the need will not go away until death , permanent life insurance is the only sure solution .
Medical care has a price . In the open market it is fixed by consumers who want a service and medical personnel who can deliver the service . The problem occurs when someone needs the treatment but can not or will not pay the price for the service . I say , Will not because every decision about spending is discretionary . Should society as a whole bear the responsibility for the medical care for every resident ? Should the nature of that care be regulated ? Should the source of funding be general ? Those are the most pressing questions when considering a universal health care system . Ultimately in a universal health care system there is a specified list of services and a funding mechanism that is not based upon need for medical services . You may need a procedure that isnt covered in the program . At the same time you might consider another procedure immoral or frivolous . Who is going to decide ? The idea of universal health care sounds very good until you understand that some medical services will probably not be covered . In the USSR dental hygiene consisted of inserting a fluorescent tube into the patients mouth and surgery was routinely conducted in a super-cold environment because anesthesia was not readily available . In that case , most Americans would consider the health care to be inadequate . However , it was available to all and at little or no direct cost to the consumer . Under most regimes universal health care becomes rationed health care . The best example is the army under war time conditions . It is called triage but it means that you treat those with the greatest likelihood of recovery before treating soldiers with graver injuries . While it might be the best utilization of manpower , the soldier with his leg blown off , might not like the wait and a narcotic shot is not going to make his family happy . The issue of who is going to pay for the universal health care system is the most sensitive . No one wants to see others in need . By the same token no one wants to pay the high bill for medical treatment . If the universal care is funded by general funds from taxes it will always be a political football . If it is paid by premiums paid by individuals there will always be a need to assist those unable to pay the premium . The problem really boils down to our expectations of treatment level , the availability and cost of that treatment and who is going to pay the price . Yes , it sounds like a great idea but it has many difficulties and when it is expected then the society will start to question the need for universal flat screen TVs , micro-wave ovens and wall-to-wall carpets . There really isnt an end unless you look at the Soviet Union and see how it ended .
Who `` needs '' life insurance coverage ? Anyone who has someone who would be financially adversely affected by their demise . That would include anyone upon whom the burden of final expenses would fall . This would also include creditors who would bear the unpaid balances on loans . A person who wants to leave a donation or legacy to a person or organization , but whose estate would fall short of the amount desired to be passed on would also fall into the category of one who needs life insurance coverage .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Those who need life insurance the most fall in two categories . 1 -RRB- Those who owe somebody . 2 -RRB- Those who love somebody . If you fall in one of those categories you need life insurance . I can not even begin to tell all the stories I have seen of a loved one passing on leaving the rest of the family decimated without income . To me life insurance is one of the true selfless acts of love one could show their family . I recommend every have this discussion with your family and your agent about your need for life insurance .
There are agents who contend that people should only buy term life insurance , and other agents who feel that people should only buy whole life . Most of us , though , believe that there are places in financial portfolios for both term and whole life insurance . Just as life insurance products are created to meet different needs , the type of need you have is what makes term or whole life better for you . If your need is for a lot of coverage for short period of time , term would probably work best for you . If your need is for a policy to pay for funeral expenses , whole life is probably better . An agency that sells both types can help advise you so that you get the best policy to suit your needs .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Anyone can use an annuity . If you 're asking who is most likely to benefit most from an annuity that answer would be anyone who needs a stable , predictable , and reliable income stream . Another type of person who benefits from owning an annuity is anyone who believes they will live a long time as annuities can provide income that lasts for ones lifetime even if the income stream is more than the initial money in the annuity .
Because insurance primarily deals with `` pure risk '' , the chance of loss but not the chance for gain . The most effective way for a insurer toeffectivelymanage their own costs and to pay out on claims while still being profitable is through `` risk pooling '' which is the practice of grouping a large number ofhomogeneousand independent risks . By risk pooling those who subject the insurer to excessive claims should be off set by the policy holders who under use their policies . However the current market is notbalanced . . one of the goals of PPACA , therefore the majority of individuals who areseekinghealth coverage are the ones who are going to be mostlikelyto incur expensive claims . There are several other factors such as hospitals , when they extend charity care to poverty stricken individuals who need treatment they are forced to reconcile their budgets by charging more to the individuals who have the means to pay ... another area that PPACA aims to address .
It is really not the person being insured who needs life insurance . Rather , it is those they leave behind . If you have dependents who would suffer financially if you were to pass away , you probably need life insurance . If you owe money that your dependents would have a hard time paying off , you probably need life insurance to pay off that debt or mortgage . Many people feel they have their affairs in order without the need of life insurance . The problem is , disasters or tragedies can chip away at those funds , and what you had hoped to be there , can be depleted before death occurs . That is where having at least some life insurance is necessary for most people .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does My US Car Insurance Cover Driving In Europe ?
United States Auto insurance onlycoversthe United States , it 's territories and Canada . In order to operate a vehicle in Europe you would have to purchase coverage there as Europe does not recognize US insurance . Also the US insurance carriers have no recourse in the event of a law suit in a country outside their jurisdiction . Man US insurance carriers do cover you into Mexico but I recommend if entering Mexico you purchase Mexican Insurance as it is illegal in Mexico to drive without Mexican Insurance .
US auto insurance does not cover you for driving a vehicle in Europe . It 's US insurance and will only cover you in the United States , Canada and US Territories . . US insurance has no jurisdiction in Europe and is unable to defend or bring suit in a court case . If you travel to Europe and rent a vehicle for example you will need to purchase temporary insurance if made available .
United States Auto insurance onlycoversthe United States , it 's territories and Canada . In order to operate a vehicle in Europe you would have to purchase coverage there as Europe does not recognize US insurance . Also the US insurance carriers have no recourse in the event of a law suit in a country outside their jurisdiction . Man US insurance carriers do cover you into Mexico but I recommend if entering Mexico you purchase Mexican Insurance as it is illegal in Mexico to drive without Mexican Insurance .
Group 16 is a classification of vehicles -LRB- mostly used in Europe -RRB- that are used to distinguish risk from other groups . For example , a Fiat 500 C and a Ford Fiesta are typically found in that group . If you live here in the US and will not be visiting Europe , it will not impact you .
Your insurance policy purchased in the United States will only cover rental car coverage in the United States , Canada , and it 's territories which would include Puerto Rico and Guam . Other countries do not recognize USinsurancein this particular situation and US based companies are not able to bring suit or defend out of US jurisdiction . You will need to purchase the insurance offered to you at the time of renting a car in Europe .
`` Non-Life Insurance '' , or `` General Insurance '' , in Europe is the equivalent of `` Property and Casualty Insurance '' in the United States and Canada . It is insurance that covers loss from a particular financial event . It does not cover a person 's life , as life insurance does . Therefore , it is called `` non-life '' insurance .
Car insurance groups -LRB- this terminology is used mostly in parts of Europe -RRB- vehicles according to their risk . Although we do the same thing here in the US , we tend to use different descriptions for the classifications . A broker that is experienced in these types of groupings can tell you where your vehicle should be placed .
Most U.S. insurance companies do not do business in Europe . There are some that do . Check with your agent . You will probably find that your current coverage extends from the USA into Canada and along a strip of the Mexican border . There are many insurance companies that will be glad to help you find coverage in Europe . Enjoy the scenery and dont forget that the rules of the road are a bit different .
I am assuming you are referring to renting a vehicle in Europe and your US coverage extending to the rental car . This totally depends on your carrier and their policy . Most likely NO , some -LRB- though not all -RRB- US carriers will extend coverage to Canada -LRB- many used to extend to Mexico as well , but more and more are removing this coverage -RRB- . There may be a few carriers out there that would extend to European Countries , but the only way to know for sure is to call them or you agent directly and ask . I 'd get it in writing too ... .
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Global Index Universal Life Insurance is IUL that offers interest crediting based on an equity index strategy option that includes foreign stock market indexes in addition to US stock marked indexes . Non US indexes commonly used are the EuroSTOXX 50 Index -LRB- Western Europe -RRB- and the Hang Seng Index -LRB- Hong Kong -RRB- . Depending on the Global Index Universal Life product , it usually offers the choices of a fixed interest strategy , an indexed strategy , or a combination of the two . The features of IUL that attracts consumers is the potential to accumulate higher than normal cash values through their ability to take advantage of the upside potential of the market . Yet there is a 0 % floor that helps protect them against downside risks .
Direct Line is handed in Europe and morespecifically , Great Britain . Here in the United States , there are many major car insurance companies that offer affordable coverage . You can easily shop and compare different rates through experienced brokers . Just like the famous saying says ... We shop and you save ! And it 's true !
A terminal bonus -LRB- or capital bonus , or final bonus -RRB- can be paid upon maturity of a mutual policy . This is a feature of some `` with-profit '' Whole Life policies in Europe and Canada and other countries in the Commonwealth of Nations . It is comparable to a final dividend in the US .
Critical illness insurance is a relatively new product in the US . Originating in South Africa and Europe , critical illness customarily pays a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis for as many as 20 or so `` dread diseases '' . More broad in scope than just a cancer plan , critical illness is something everyone should consider .
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , I ca n't give you a very positive answer . I do not know of a single US auto insurer that will extend coverage to you overseas . I know that if you were asking about Canada , or even Mexico , that I could give you a better answer , but not for Europe , I 'm afraid . Sorry , and thanks for asking !
Yours is an excellent question as many people do not realize that many group and individual health insurance policies do not cover them outside of the USA . There are specialized policies available to cover you when you are travelling outside the country . You should contact an insurance agent to explain your needs and to assist you in finding the policy best suited to your needs . Taking a cruise or travelling through Europe for a few weeks can be an entirely different situation than perhaps planning to be away for months or perhaps years on an overseas contracting assignment or religious or charitable mission trip . Also , your place of destination may be an important factor , working in Switzerland for a year is a totally different situation than volunteering to go to Syria or Afghanistan . If you need help with this need please feel free to contact me .
That is a great question ! There were some types of travelers insurances offered in the 1840 's that covered you if your train crashed or steamboat sank , but other than that , there really was n't much until the late 1800 's when disability policies became popular . Britain passed a law in the early 1900 's that created a `` National Health Insurance '' , and most of Europe kind of adopted similar laws , but we did n't catch on until 1929 when us Texans -LRB- Baylor University Hospital , and some local teachers , I think -RRB- created a system of standardized costs for hospital stays . Shortly thereafter came Blue Cross/Blue Shield , and then all kinds of competing companies . The history of insurance is interesting stuff . Thanks for asking !
Axa home insurance , I believe , is available in Great Britain . It appears to be a reputable company but I am not familiar with companies in Europe . While it is true that I have a great British accent , which is popular at gatherings with folks from England , I am tot well-versed regarding their insurers .
I presume that you are not eligible for Medicare for some reason . You might investigate individual health insurance though with the open enrollment season having concluded on February 15th you would have to have a `` Change of Life Status '' event occur or qualify under the provisions of the upcoming special election period beginning March 15th -LRB- this is for people who were uninsured in 2014 and have just figured out they are going to have to pay the individual mandate tax penalty and that they would be subject to the individual tax mandate penalty for the 2015 tax year -RRB- . If you were to qualify you would have to be prepared to pay a pretty high monthly premium . If you have a business or have a spouse that has a business and some employees you might consider a group health plan . I recently wrote a small group where a man about your age had emigrated from Europe because he had married an American lady about 20 years younger than him and they had a small business with a couple of other employees . that man is now covered as his spouse 's dependent under their small group plan .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Are Some Life Insurance Companies ?
There are literally hundreds of life insurance companies in the United States alone and hundreds more abroad . Some of the more well known companies are Metlife , Genworth , NY Life , Prudential , American General , ING , Transamerica and Northwestern Mutual . You know these companies because of their marketing budgets . In most cases these companies have higher premiums because they must of set their advertising budgets . There are several other lesser known life insurance companies like SBLI , Banner Life , Assurity , North American , Fidelity Security and AXA Equitible that usually a life insurance broker would know . These companies are just as good and financially sound as the more well known companies , they just do n't have the larger marketing budgets and rely on brokers to sell their policies . This usually translates into more affordable premiums to the consumer . I recommend contacting an independent broker to professionally shop for the best polices at the best rates for your unique situation .
There 's hundreds and hundreds of companies out there . A list of some of the top companies is as follows : 1 -RRB- American General 2 -RRB- MetLife 3 -RRB- Lincoln National Life 4 -RRB- Prudential 5 -RRB- Transamerica 6 -RRB- ING 7 -RRB- Principal National 8 -RRB- Mass Mutual 9 -RRB- Guardian 10 -RRB- Banner Life 11 -RRB- Genworth 12 -RRB- New York Life 13 -RRB- United of Omaha / Mutual of Omaha 14 -RRB- SBLI -LRB- Savings Bank Life Insurance Company of Massachusetts -RRB- 15 -RRB- John Hancock When looking for a life insurance policy , there 's a ton of information to sift through and comprehend . An independent broker can help you find the program that will best serve your needs . If you would like some assistance , send me a private message on here or check out my website -LRB- a link is available on my profile page -RRB- .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Which life insurance company is the best ? I think that depends on a few factors . Chief among them are the risk profile you present , and the type of product you want to purchase . At the end of the day , it becomes a question of which will give you the best underwriting . Your risk profile is characterized by the underwriting challenges you pose . I am sure you know that life insurance underwriting covers many factors . These include gender ; nicotine use ; current health ; medical history ; family medical history ; occupation ; avocation ; foreign travel history and plans ; lifestyle with regards to alcohol and drug use ; financial situation ; and criminal , financial , and motor vehicle record . Much to look at . And you know what ? In some way , shape , or form , all these factors can have an impact on your mortality . For most people , one or more of these factors are more operative than the others . Therefore you need to look for a company who will be most competitive in underwriting that particular risk factor . Some companies will be more competitive for diabetics . Some companies will be more competitive for people with a cancer history . Some companies will be more competitive for mountain climbers . Some companies will be more competitive for scuba divers . Some companies will be more competitive for people with a bankruptcy on their record . And on and on and on . It is the job of your broker to direct you to the right company . Also remember that companies tend to specialize in the products they manufacture . Some lean towards cheap term insurance . Others lean towards whole life insurance . Some lean towards guaranteed universal life insurance , while others lean towards interest-based universal life insurance . Once your broker prequalifies you and identifies the company that will give you the lowest cost for your coverage , you can then determine which product they make available that would make the most sense , given the life insurance strategy you want to employ . Important note : given that not every company makes available every type of product , you might have to re-think your choice of product once you find out which company will give you the best underwriting . But that is OK at least you will be getting the most value for your dollar .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
The best insurance company is the company that pays the most when you have a loss . All insurance companies are companies that manage a pool of similar risks . Every insurance company is regulated by the insurance commissioner in the state where the company is organized and the state where the company is allowed to transact business . This combination of state supervision is designed to make sure that each company keeps their promises . There are rating bureaus that offer information concerning various insurance companies . These bureaus generally give higher ratings to larger companies with longer histories . They are rating the financial capacity of the companies . While this is a good indicator of which insurance company to choose it is far from the only criteria . Ultimately most people buy homeowners insurance from an agent . That agent might represent one company or one hundred companies . The point is that the relationship is not with the company as much as it is with the agent . People buy insurance from people that they trust . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . The agent will propose a company . Few reject the company selected by the agent . The role of the company is to keep the promises that it makes . There are a wide range of homes for insurance companies to insure . Some companies have an appetite for homes that are in the mountains or heavily wooded areas . Other companies will not even consider such a risk . Some companies will insure homes on bluffs overlooking the ocean while others wont consider such a risk . Underwriting will often have special rules regarding roof type , location of an evaporative cooler , presence of certain pets and presence of certain types of recreational equipment . There are many reasons for some of these underwriting decisions but the agent will be able to identify the best company for you . The underwriter will try to suggest appropriate coverages . Even if you had the most highly rated company if the limits selected are not adequate , you could be left with a large loss in the event of a disaster . For example , you might have a significant amount of jewelry , photographic equipment , or musical instruments . If these are not insured correctly their loss could represent a significant financial loss for you . The most significant area of underinsuring is liability . Your agent should let you know the highest amount that the company will provide . If you choose less coverage , any loss in excess to the limit in the policy will come out of your assets . Your agent should tell you about the availability of umbrella liability coverage . A lawsuit can make havoc out of the best financial plan . Finally the way that the company pays the loss when you have a claim is the most critical factor . Homeowners claims are infrequent but tend to be severe . It is important that the agent you have selected assists you during this critical period . Maintaining communications with you during a claim is an identification of a really good insurance company .
By IRS definition Life Insurance Dividends are considered a return of `` unused premium '' and not subject to income tax as they have already been taxed going in as premium . Mutual companies pay dividends to policyholders as they have no stockholders as owners of the company . The permanent policyholders -LRB- not term , not universal life policyholders -RRB- are considered the owners of the company and dividends are applied to their whole life policies . A dividend for a mutual life insurance company is a combination of investment return , positive mortality experience -LRB- fewer deaths than expected -RRB- and operating expense savings and what is held as surplus by the company . Money beyond what the company needs or projects is returned to whole life policyholders in that form of a dividend . The surplus is what protects the company if for some reason they goof . Most mutual companies have been paying dividends consistently for more than a century .
Unfortunately , there is n't one company that is best in the immediate annuity marketplace . Different companies are more and/or less competitive depending on demographics . A company might have better rates for women than men or for someone in their 60s versus someone in their 80s . Some companies also offer inflation adjustments while some do n't . Some companies even allow some access to monies already annuitized . It really depends on the person and their situation . It is best to work with an independent broker that can show you some of the top companies with the top rates so that you can pick what is best for your situation .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
There is no one life insurance COMPANY that is the best for doctors , although some companies are much more lenient than others regarding medical records . In my experience in writing physicians ' life insurance , many physicians treat themselves , and thus do not have the medical records that many companies require for policies with large face amounts . I have much better results with some companies than others , for that reason . Regarding what TYPE of life insurance to get , you will want to fit your policy to your need . If you have a temporary need , just as wanting your mortgage to be paid off if you died , you will save money by taking your policy in 20 or 30 year Term . If you want a vehicle for tax favored income in retirement , Indexed Universal Life works well . A knowledgeable agent can guide you through your choices so that you get the most bang for your buck . Finally , the AGENT you choose is important for doctors . Some agents will not understand the medical terms you use . Some do not know the underwriting process well enough to work with insurance companies for cases `` outside the box '' . Some will try to take advantage of what they perceive to be your `` wealth '' . Choose an agent who will treat you like a human being , who knows how to write all types of policies , and who understands underwriting enough that they can get you a fair price .
here is a good chance you will . Lets cover some of the what ifs : What if you need to maximize your pension distribution by taking it out during your lifetime only ? Life insurance will help you cover your spouse . What if you have any remaining debts , such as a second mortgage ? Or if you have any dependents , such as a child who still need some financial assistance ? Life insurance would protect them . What if you want a really strong guaranteed portion of your asset portfolio ? The guarantees in life insurance cash value contracts are very competitive . What if your net worth is high and you want to preserve your estate from federal and state taxation ? Life insurance would allow you to protect your assets and still pay the government . What if you have formed very strong ties with a charity , and would like to support it as a legacy ? Life insurance can turn a comparatively small premium into a very substantial gift for them . Its kind of surprising , isnt it , about how our need for life insurance can basically last our entire life !
It can be very confusing to try to figure out what type of life insurance policy to buy , what amount , and from what company . As a rule , life insurance policies only come in a few types -LRB- Term , Whole , Universal and variations such as Indexed or Variable -RRB- . Many companies carry all of them . However , some policies do have features that are more favorable than others . E.g. longer guarantee periods , greater cash value , etc. . In that respect , some companies carry policies with better features than others . It is always a good idea to look at the rating of the life insurance company itself . If its rating with AM Best , Fitch , S&P and/or Moody 's is good , most likely the life insurance carried by that company will have good products to choose from . And you will know that they will pay out if needed , which is of utmost consideration .
Objectively , there is no one best life insurance company in the USA , although some people certainly have personal opinions about which life insurance companies they like best . There are four main rating agencies that people consult to review the financial information of life insurance companies , and to see what they are rated . These rating agencies are AM Best , Standard and Poor 's , Moody 's , and Fitch . Some also look at Weiss and others . Looking at a database of complaints against the company can also influence what someone considers to be the best life insurance company in the USA .
Video Transcript : Which life insurance company is the best ? I do n't know if I can say that , because remember , they all have different fortes . Some are great underwriting companies , some are great death benefit ; cheap premium companies . Some companies are really good about supplemental income ; their cash values are really good and they have a good track record of accumulating wealth . You want to look at ` what is the reason ? What is the area ? ' Each area has their own forte . Some people want highly-rated carriers , so you 're going to look at the big financial strength of a carrier or the carrier 's claims - paying ability . Any of those areas are separate areas of discussion and that 's why it 's difficult to ever say , `` Here 's one , or here 's the best . '' If I 'm looking for price tag , underwriting , cash value accumulation , or just cheap premium just to pay my premium off to cover my liability , it depends upon what category you 're in so I can be able to say , `` Is that the best company ? ''
A nearly impossible question to answer . How much premium can you afford ? What carrier are you purchasing coverage with ? What is your health/medical history ? What is your family/medical history ? What is your occupation ? What is your geographic location ? What is you age ? What is you height/weight ? These are just some of the factors used to determine the amount of coverage and the premium that you would pay for that coverage ; that a carrier might use . Most carriers will handle coverage rates up to one million on a regular basis . Contact a local agent to find out what would be available to you .
The cheapest long term care insurance company in Colorado varies according to the person who is applying . Some companies are better at older ages ; some are better for couples . Some are better for -LRB- or are the only ones that will take -RRB- certain health conditions . Some offers certain features at a lower price than others . To find the cheapest long term care insurance for you , contact an agency that sells a variety of long term care companies in Colorado and review your health and all the features offered with a knowledgeable agent . Together , you can work out which has the lowest price for what you qualify for and what you need .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 949 797 2424 .
If you were to cover every contingency of life with life insurance , you probably could not afford that much . Life insurance is a wonderful resource for the `` what if 's '' of life , but the `` what if 's '' can be endless . What if you died leaving your family without your income . What if before you died , you used up all your savings on doctor bills . Then , what if your spouse died shortly after you . What if the person you designated to care for your children , had just lost their job . What if ... . No one can have enough life insurance to cover every possible tragedy . But you can have enough life insurance to give your loved ones a chance . Providing them with enough income to give them time to adjust to life without you , without having to worry about getting a new job -LRB- or adding a second job to the one they already have -RRB- , is a good place to start . Giving them enough to live on until your children are grown , or for 10 years , is also a reasonable amount .
In my personal experience , all the companies I have worked with want to provide a service for their clients and do it honestly . They try hard to be fair and sometimes I have seen them bend in favor of the client . I think what people hear are the few times someone has been `` wronged '' by the company . From my own personal experience in such a case , I can say that companies can not air their side of the story . With one company I used to work with , the company offered a fair offer to settle in a small kitchen fire . The client refused and wanted the entire house rebuilt . The client went public about how the company would was not making a good offer . Over a year later , the community realized how unreasonable the client was being and his support dwindled quickly . The company had no recourse . The agents had no recourse . They could not talk about the details due to privacy issues . Meanwhile , the client is making every effort he can to publically trash the company . There are some situations where the company has to go by what the contract states and there may be some situation where it may not feel `` right '' to the client , but the company has to honor the contract . With all that said , I would recommend working with a broker to help you find an insurance company and also help fight for you in those situations where you feel like you have been wronged . Having a broker who is familiar with the people in the company will help your case more than you can imagine .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Weight Loss Surgery ?
As a rule no , not unless there is a medical necessity . Check the exclusions in your policy or contact your insurance company before the procedure to find out for sure if the procedure you need to have done is covered . Without knowing the details of the situation it is hard to give a definitive answer .
A medical exam for the coverage typically consists of a paramedical exam -LRB- height/weight check and vitals checks such as pulse and blood pressure readings -RRB- , a blood test , and a urine test - sometimes an EKG and/or cognitive testing may be required for older age individuals -RRB- . Even if it 's not asked specifically on the application itself , the carrier will see the input regarding the wls -LRB- I 'm assuming stands for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- surgery in the APS from your doctor . For any fully underwritten life insurance program , the carrier will request a copy of an APS from your doctor , in addition to the completion of a medical exam conducted for the insurance policy -RRB- . An APS is an Attending Physician Statement - in short , it 's a doctor 's summary of your medical history records . For example , if you were being treated for diabetes , it would cite your A1C reading history , prescriptions prescribed for the condition , when it was diagnosed , etc. . In the APS , the carrier will see in the doctor 's notes that you have discussed getting the wls surgery -LRB- I 'm assuming that `` wls '' is supposed to stand for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- and ask if a surgery has been scheduled and/or completed . If it has n't been completed yet , a carrier will postpone approving you for the coverage because you have an outstanding medical procedure on the books that 's still supposed to get done . From a carrier 's perspective , their risk of a claim is greatly increased when they know a surgical operation is upcoming as complications can always occur during any surgery . Please note , after a weight loss surgery procedure and you 've ideally lost a large amount of weight and want to apply for coverage , part of that weight loss can be added in to a carrier 's calculation of height/weight profile . The reason for this is quick weight loss for people -LRB- whether via surgery , diet and exercise , liposuction , etc. -RRB- can often result in some individuals gaining a percentage of that weight back - unfortunately not everyone always keeps all of the pounds off . So if you apply for coverage within 12 months of that rapid weight loss , a carrier may add half the weight loss amount back to your total . For example , if you weight 300 pounds and loss 120 pounds after a procedure , now you 're sitting at 180 pounds . If you applied for coverage soon after having lost that 120 pounds , the carrier would add 60 back to your total and base the underwriting on a height/weight profile of 240 pounds -LRB- 180 +60 -RRB- . The purpose of the 12 month differential is to show stability in the person 's weight loss and that they have a good chance of keeping off the weight . Please also note , alternative options will still result in the same outcome -LRB- e.g. non-medical life insurance -RRB- because a question on almost every application will ask in some format `` are there any outstanding tests or other medical procedures outstanding or waiting to be completed '' . You would only be able to secure a graded policy with a low face amount -LRB- $ 25k or $ 50k maximum -RRB- , which does not appear to be in the ballpark of the coverage you 're looking to secure -LRB- you noted $ 900k in your question 's statement -RRB- . If you have a policy already in force , you can elect to convert all or a portion of it to permanent coverage . The conversion would keep the risk class that the original policy had and would simply just calculate the rates based on your age . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will pay for weight loss surgery if the BMI is over 35 , if there is a health condition related to obesity that will be cured or alleviated by losing weight through the weight loss surgery , if weight loss must occur before treatment can be effectively undertaken for another health problem , and if other treatments are not expected to work to produce sufficient weight loss . There is a psychological evaluation done prior to surgery to make sure it should be done .
It sounds like you have a decision to make : A. postpone or cancel your elective weight loss surgery so that you can get the life insurance now , or B.postpone getting life insurance until after you have your weight loss surgery . If you have found a policy for which you qualify weight wise , are not suffering health complications from your weight , and need $ 900,000 of coverage for a loan or other reason , you could probably qualify by simply postponing your surgery for a year . Of course , if your health is at risk , getting the surgery can not only help your health , but improve your life insurance rates in the future .
Medicare will pay for weight loss programs under certain conditions . Some things to know are : Medicare will pay for weight loss programs only if weight loss is needed to treat certain health conditions related to being overweight , or is needed before surgery to reduce the risk of complications . Up to three hours of individual counseling about weight loss is provided the first year , and two hours per year after that . If you need more treatment than that , Medicare may pay for more with a doctor 's prescription and if the treatment is medially approved by Medicare .
Medicare will cover weight loss programs when weight has a direct impact on health . Some health conditions that may be alleviated by weight loss are sleep apnea , hypertension , joint pain , and diabetes type 2 . Medicare will pay for 3 hours of weight management counseling the first year and two hours of counseling each year after that . If further treatment is needed , Medicare can provide more , including gastric bypass surgery , if needed .
Medicare can cover gastric bypass surgery under certain conditions . Some of those are : 1 -RRB- BMI must be 35 or greater . 2 -RRB- There must be at least one health condition related to weight . 3 -RRB- There must be documentation of failure to lose weight by other methods . 4 -RRB- A psychological evaluation is required . 5 -RRB- Other medical treatments for weight loss have been ruled out . 6 -RRB- The provider and type of surgery must be approved by Medicare .
In some situations Medicare will cover weight loss programs . If you have medical conditions that can be treated or better managed with weight loss , Medicare may pay for weight loss counseling . If weight loss is needed to minimize or avoid complications of surgery , Medicare may pay for weight loss programs .
As a general rule , a `` tummy tuck '' is viewed as cosmetic surgery and is not covered by health insurance polices . However , obesity is becoming an increasing problem in our nation.This has resulted in a growing number of people who have reached health or life threatening levels of morbid obesity for which they have had either prescription and/or surgical treatments that result in extreme weight loss . In some cases the weight gain has stretched the person 's skin to such an extent that after their extreme weight loss following treatment their skin does not return to normal levels and the person is left with folds of skin which can , in some cases , become sources of medical problems themselves -LRB- e.g. - severe rashes and infections -RRB- . In these extreme circumstances the insurance company may agree that it is an issue of medical necessity that this issue be surgically addressed and the will approve coverage for the removal or lifting of this excess skin tissue . This has been the only circumstance where I have seen an insurance carrier approve what might be construed as a tummy tuck .
Medicare will pay for laparoscopic adjustable gastric band if the following three conditions are met : 1 -RRB- You must have a BMI of 35 or over at the time of surgery ; 2 -RRB- You must have a qualifying health condition associated with your being overweight that losing weight through gastric banding would help ; and 3 -RRB- You must complete a 6 month Physician Supervised Weight Loss Program proximate to the time of the surgery .
Most CIGNA health policies will cover gastric bypass surgery . However , the reader should note that CIGNA also administers self-funded health plans where the employer can define many elements of coverage and that it is possible that some much older fully insured plans still exist where such surgery was excluded or significantly limited . So check your certificate of coverage first or call CIGNA member services for guidance on this issue for your specific policy . In general terms , while gastric bypass surgery is covered , it is as more of a last resort than as a first course of action because this is a serious surgical procedure that is not without complications . The candidate will have to meet several criteria for pre-approval by CIGNA for this procedure to be approved for coverage and you will have to show that other , less invasive methods of weight loss have been tried and found to be ineffective .
Medicare covers some weight loss programs when medically necessary . There must be a health condition that would be alleviated by weight loss in order for Medicare to pay . The program can include counseling , or , if more is needed , Medicare may pay for more options , including gastric bypass surgery under certain conditions .
Yes , bariatric surgery can be covered by Medicare under some conditions . Some of the conditions are that the patient 's BMI -LRB- Body Mass Index -RRB- must over 35 , they have obtained a psychological evaluation and ascertained in several ways that weight loss surgery is the best option , and have a health condition connected to being overweight that will be helped by having bariatric surgery .
Medicare will pay for lap band surgery if the patient 's BMI is over 35 , if the surgery has been deemed medically necessary due to other failed treatment , if there has been a psychological evaluation indicating that lap band surgery could be successful , and if the obesity has existed for some time . One of the keys as to whether Medicare will pay for lap band surgery is if there exists a health condition related to the patient 's obesity . If the obese individual is not suffering from sleep apnea , type 2 diabetes , hypertension , or other weight related conditions , Medicare will not pay for lap band surgery .
Medicare will pay for gastric sleeve , gastric bypass , lap band , or duodenal switch for weight loss , under certain conditions . There must be a health problem associated with being obese , such as sleep apnea or type 2 diabetes . The condition of being overweight must have existed for at least 5 years . You must pass a psychological evaluation , have tried at least one other weight loss program that has failed , and other illnesses as the cause of your obesity must be ruled out . You also need a BMI of over 35 to be approved for Medicare gastric sleeve surgery .
Yes , Medicare will pay for a duodenal switch if there is evidence that the weight loss surgery is medically necessary . Among other things , the patient 's BMI must be 35 or more and there must be a health condition that will be alleviated or cured by losing a lot of weight .
Bariatric surgery -LRB- lap band , gastric bypass -RRB- can be a covered expense under Medicare in some situations . If your doctor certifies that you are morbidly obese and other forms of weight loss have not been successful , you may be considered a surgical candidate if you are healthy enough to survive the surgery .
In some cases you may qualify for a covered gastric bypass under Medicare . Your doctor must attest that you are morbidly obese and other methods of weight loss have not been effective . Surgery can be an option if you are otherwise healthy enough to survive the surgery . If you are under 65 and morbidly obese you may qualify for SSDI and Medicare .
While this procedure may cost in excess of $ 10,000 , it is increasingly being viewed as a viable option for obese patients considering weight loss surgery . Coverage for this procedure can vary from state to state and certainly from one insurance carrier to another . So , you should certainly check with your insurance carrier and verify if this procedure is covered under your specific policy , to what extent , and what medical criteria must be met for this procedure to be approved . A procedure of this magnitude will not be the starting point in addressing a person 's weight control problems , you will have to exhaust other less risky options before proceeding to any surgical solution . AETNA , CIGNA , United Healthcare , some Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and other regional carriers are known to have covered this procedure . I do not believe that Medicare currently covers this procedure nor is it likely to be covered under most state 's Medicaid plans . Remember , this will have to be a medially necessary procedure , you will almost certainly have to meet the criteria for being morbidly obese and have not had success with other treatment methods before you should have any expectation of this procedure being approved by your health insurance carrier .
Gastric bypass and other forms of bariatric surgery intended to promote weight loss may be covered by your health insurance plan . Those who are morbidly obese and have tried other forms of weight loss without success may be approved for gastric bypass . Your doctor must document your condition and history and certify that you are healthy enough to survive surgery .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Can I Change My Medigap Plan ?
In general , you can change your Medigap Plan any time of the year . You will have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan -- unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation -LRB- the rights you have in certain situations when insurance companies are bound by law to sell you a Medigap Policy and ca n't deny you because of current or past health issues -RRB- . To qualify medically , means you have to answer the health questions on the insurance carrier 's application and list prescription medications taken in the last 12 - 24 months . Every insurance company 's health questions are unique , as is each individual . A licensed independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance is a great resource for helping you find which insurance companies you may qualify with -- and , which ones have the best premiums for the Medigap Plan benefits you want . Thank you for reading my response . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Medigap , also know as Medicare Supplement insurance can be changed at any time . You do not have to wait until open enrollment in October . Since Medicare Supplements are in addition to Original Medicare , the rules are different than a Medicare Advantage Plan that basically takes the place of Original Medicare . If you have a prescription drug plan , -LRB- Part D -RRB- you will have to wait until Open Enrollment October 15th through December 7th to change the Part D .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
You can change your Medigap Plan at any point throughout the year . You do not have to wait for AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period from Oct. 15 - Dec 7 -RRB- . The Annual Election Period only applies to Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Plans . You 'll have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan if you are not in your Open Enrollment Period or other Guaranteed Issue situation . To medically qualify , you have to answer health questions on the insurance application and then get approved through the medical underwriting department . It is best to contact Medicare or an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to see if you are still in Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation . If you have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan , an independent agent can review your health history and help determine which insurance companies are best suited for your situation . There are several reasons why you may want to change your Medigap plan -LRB- lower premium , more benefits , less benefits -RRB- . The main reason people want to change is usually because of price . Over time , premiums increase and what you may be paying for Plan F may be very different from your neighbor . Although Medigap plan benefits are standardized , the price is not . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can provide quotes for your Medigap Plan so you can compare it to what you 're currently paying . Please feel free to read this article which gives a little more detail about changing your Medigap insurance . WEBSITELINK Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you with your specific situation .
Each Medigap plan can be offered as a `` select '' plan . The premiums for these plans are generally less than those of the traditional Medigap plans , however , they require you use in-network doctors and hospitals -LRB- much like how an HMO works -RRB- to receive full benefits -LRB- except in the case of an emergency -RRB- . If you use a provider outside of the network , you may be responsible for the co-insurance that is not covered under Original Medicare as long as you use a doctor/hospital that accepts Medicare , If you buy a select Medigap plan and decide you would rather have a standard Medigap plan , you can change it to the standard plan within 12 months of when you started the coverage . A common question with select plans is `` if I move , can I take my coverage with me ? . Under select Medigap plans , you would have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a new Medigap plan which plans are available depends on your zip code as not every plan is available in a given location . If applying for a new Medigap plan via a guaranteed-issue right , you can apply as early as 60 calendar days and up to 63 days after your coverage ended to buy a plan . Under a standard plan , you can take the plan with you as they are guaranteed renewable and have no networks . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
Yes , you can change Medigap Plans anytime it benefits you and during anytime of the year . One of the great things about having a Medigap Plan is you do n't have to wait for a certain special time of the year to make a change . You have total control over your Medigap Plan . On the flip side of that , you can also keep your Medigap Plan the rest of your life . The benefits can never change . It is guaranteed renewable which means as long as you pay your premium they can never cancel your plan for any reason . Medigap Plans and rates change all the time so it is a good idea to get a review of your plan every few years . We save people between $ 500 - $ 1,800 per year by doing that review for them and finding the same Medigap Plan for less with another top `` A '' rated carrier . Regardless of what carrier you currently have eventually the premiums will rise . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Yes . You can apply for a new Medigap plan at any point during the year . People often change their Medigap plans for a number of reasons , the most common being : You want to reduce your expenses by securing a lower premium from a policy with the same benefits -LRB- purchasing a Plan F with company B and dropping the existing Plan F with company A -RRB- . - this is the most common reason why people change their Medigap plans . Medigap plans are standardized so the coverage under a plan F is the same regardless of the company it 's through . So often people want to look at lowering their premiums when their policy gets hit with a rate increase . You may not need/want all of the benefits you 're paying for or you need/want more benefits than you have under your existing plan . Please note , if you do not have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a Medigap plan without any medical underwriting , you would have to answer the health questions on the application . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable . So in the event you could not medically qualify for coverage under a new Medigap plan , you always have the option of keeping what you have . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a new Medigap plan at any point during the year . People often change their Medigap plans for a number of reasons , the most common being : You want to reduce your expenses by securing a lower premium from a policy with the same benefits -LRB- purchasing a Plan F with company B and dropping the existing Plan F with company A -RRB- . - this is the most common reason why people change their Medigap plans . Medigap plans are standardized so the coverage under a plan F is the same regardless of the company it 's through . So often people want to look at lowering their premiums when their policy gets hit with a rate increase . You may not need/want all of the benefits you 're paying for or you need/want more benefits than you have under your existing plan . Please note , if you do not have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a Medigap plan without any medical underwriting , you would have to answer the health questions on the application . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable . So in the event you could not medically qualify for coverage under a new Medigap plan , you always have the option of keeping what you have . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a new Medigap plan at any point during the year . People often change their Medigap plans for a number of reasons , the most common being : You want to reduce your expenses by securing a lower premium from a policy with the same benefits -LRB- purchasing a Plan F with company B and dropping the existing Plan F with company A -RRB- . - this is the most common reason why people change their Medigap plans . Medigap plans are standardized so the coverage under a plan F is the same regardless of the company it 's through . So often people want to look at lowering their premiums when their policy gets hit with a rate increase . You may not need/want all of the benefits you 're paying for or you need/want more benefits than you have under your existing plan . Please note , if you do not have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a Medigap plan without any medical underwriting , you would have to answer the health questions on the application . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable . So in the event you could not medically qualify for coverage under a new Medigap plan , you always have the option of keeping what you have . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes . You can apply for a new Medigap plan at any point during the year . People often change their Medigap plans for a number of reasons , the most common being : You want to reduce your expenses by securing a lower premium from a policy with the same benefits -LRB- purchasing a Plan F with company B and dropping the existing Plan F with company A -RRB- . - this is the most common reason why people change their Medigap plans . Medigap plans are standardized so the coverage under a plan F is the same regardless of the company it 's through . So often people want to look at lowering their premiums when their policy gets hit with a rate increase . You may not need/want all of the benefits you 're paying for You need/want more benefits than you have under your existing plan Please note , if you do not have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a Medigap plan without any medical underwriting , you would have to answer the health questions on the application . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable . So in the event you could not medically qualify for coverage under a new Medigap plan , you always have the option of keeping what you have . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
Typically , when you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and you have a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan , you will not need to have an additional health plan . Original Medicare -LRB- parts A & B -RRB- cover approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses - Medigap plans will pay all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you have group coverage as well , you would be spending extra money on those premiums unnecessarily . You can not be forced to go on her group health insurance if the two of you got married - it 's only an available option for you . If you have a Medicare supplement plan other than a plan F or plan G , I would recommend switching to one of those two plans before adding yourself to your fiance 's group coverage - it would save you countless dollars by comparison . Plan F provides full coverage - every other plan provides good coverage , but you will share some of the expenses . I would recommend consulting with an experienced independent Medigap broker who can review your specific situation and help you determine the best course of action . I would also suggest reviewing the Medigap plan you currently have to see if there are better rates available -LRB- the plans are standardized meaning you regardless of which carrier it 's through , the benefits are exactly the same - plan F from company A is the same as plan F from company B -RRB- . Changing a Medigap plan can be completed at anytime during the year - you do not have to wait for the annual enrollment period like you would with prescription drug plans or Medicare advantage plans . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage -LRB- my background is in senior insurance -RRB- and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How To Set Up A Personal Retirement Plan ?
There are many options for funding retirement . But here are the two tributaries of thought . The first thing you should determine is your effective tax bracket . If your tax bracket is high you may want to consider a qualified plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , especially if your employer offers a contribution match . But if your effective tax bracket is small and you have no employer sponsored plan , then a non qualified retirement alternative that uses life insurance or annuities should be a consideration .
First determine your retirement plan should be qualified or non-qualified . Are you a business owner or an individual ? Are you or your business in a high tax bracket ? How long do you think youll contribute to the plan and what amounts will you contribute ? Then you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes risk assessment , financial goals and a life expectancy report . After you have completed this list , you can determine which qualified plan to use .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
How much can I borrow from my retirement plan ? Now if I could flick your ear like your dad used to do , I would say `` why would you want to ? '' Just because a loan provision can be included within your plan , it does n't mean you should exhaust EVERY other possibility first . Borrowing from your retirement plan is far and away the last possible choice to make . That said ... The limits for loans can be set by your plan . Borrowing provisions can be set up by your plan . Payback interest rate is set up by your plan . Your plan advisory board will decide if a loan request has merits . Usually the money you take from your plan is no longer participating in plan returns , so if you 're investment is earning 10 % and your loan payback provision is 4 % , you 're making 4 % on your money . If you get laid off or quit your job , your loan from your retirement plan is `` called '' immediately . Failure to pay it back when called results in a `` premature distribution '' which makes your `` loan '' income , along with a penalty , so your income taxes could change considerably . Try to remember just because a feature is available , does n't mean you should use it .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
How to set up a retirement plan ? The first thing you want to do is figure out your options . If your a business owner than their are tax advantages you can have for setting up a retirement plan for your employees . Some choices are 401k , IRA , SEP , Roth IRA , life insurance , pension plan . Once you know and learn which retirement plan you want to implement than the next step is paper work . You should always speak to a professional retirement planner .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
In Canada , most mutual funds are set up as trusts . What that means to investors is that everything flows through to the investor . Interest , capital gains and dividends flow through and the mutual fund does not pay any of the taxes . The fund earns its `` own money '' on fees and would pay tax on that income . Note : Some mutual funds are set up as `` corporate class '' , they also `` flow through '' If you have further questions , or if you feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . Mutual funds are often used as part of a retirement plan . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
How to set up a personal retirement plan is a process . First start with the end in mind determine what retirement success would look like for you . Once you have an idea then you can determine what it would take to fund it . Retirement planning can be complex as there are many factors to consider and it is easy to put it aside for another day . The saying the journey of a thousand miles begins with the first step is applicable here - start saving a regular percent of your earnings today . Let the power of compound interest work for you . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
It depends on how your retirement plans was set up in Florida . We do many small business retirement plans in Florida and when the business sets up the 401k for example they can elect to allow employees to borrow from their own account or not . However , some types of retirement plans do not allow you to borrow from them . You should speak to the person who set up your retirement plan to determine what options you have .
A good independent agent who works with retirement planning can help you set up your retirement plan . Depending on your needs and situation , you may choose to set up a simple IRA qualified annuity . If you have access to a 401k at work you have a great source to help get you started . You need the help of someone familiar with retirement planning .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Setting up a personal retirement plan first starts with your frame of mind . Are you committed to following a plan , as close as possible , to get to your end goal ? If you answer yes , then you are ready to move forward . First , grab all your different accounts which you have monies in . This will include your checking & saving , and money market accounts and retirement accounts including IRA 's & your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- if you have it through your employment . If you do n't have these type of accounts , it is ok . You just need to know where you are to start . The idea is to figure out how much you can start to realistically set aside every month or year . Then start to do this and stick with it . Once you get this habit established , you will need to know how much you need to retire . This number can be humbling however do not let it get you down . You have to have a goal to get to . At this point , I would recommend sitting down with a professional who can help you make some wise choices as there are several vehicles available but are not all created the same . Working with someone can and will help you to stay accountable to yourself striving to reach your end goal . Reach out to me if you have any additional questions .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
Life Insurance Trusts allow Insurance proceeds to go into a trust and allocated where the person who controls the trust sees fit . It is a great way to ensure your wishes are carried out with the proceeds deposited . In an Irrevocable Life Insurance trusts the person who sets it up basically loses the ability to change the trust . It may be used to prevent anyone else from changing the original intention behind why the trust was first set up . It is a great tool to ensure future financial investments/distributions are adhered to . A Life Insurance professional can explain the basics of how insurance fits in and then direct you to a legal professional who can set it up .
How to set up a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- ? First before you decide on a 401k as your retirement plan , make sure it makes sense . Most people know the name 401k and sort of apply it as all retirement plans , but actually it 's one of many plans out there that an employer can use . The big thing I would suggest anyone look at before establishing a retirement plan is the cost of the plan itself . Typically a 401k will have fees for all people under the plan , participating or not . You will have discrimination tests to be run on the plan and contributions . Before you commit to a particular plan , check and see what the plan cost to operate . If your costs are greater than your returns , is it a good choice ?
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Disability Insurance Worth The Investment ?
If you were laid up and could n't work for three to six months , would you be able to meet your expenses and put food on the table ? Would you have to dip into the kids college fund to do it ? How will you pay your house payment and car payment ? How will you pay your health insurance premium ? You tell me - is disability insurance worth it ?
Considering the average US worker has 3 months worth of cash reserves , yet the average long term disability claim is 31.2 months , I 'd say Disability Insurance is more than worth it . If you can no longer work , you wo n't be receiving you usual paycheck , which in turn means you wo n't be able to make your usual payments -LRB- mortgage , bills , groceries , etc. -RRB- . DI pays a monthly benefit that can keep you afloat so you can focus on healing and getting back to work , rather than worrying about your finances .
Insurance ... . be it Disability Insurance or Long Term Care Insurance or Life Insurance or whatever type of insurance that you buy ... . is not really worth the money put into it unless you need it . But if you do need it , it is beyond worth it . Also , the peace of mind that having insurance gives has a value . So Aflac Disability Insurance is worth it if you become disabled . And if you do n't , it may be worth it to you to not have had to worry about the possibility of being without an income for any significant length of time .
There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Deferred annuities are used as money accumulation vehicles , since they are issued by insurance companies they have features and guarantees other investments can not match . These are of particular interest to self - employed -LRB- any age -RRB- , OR those within 10 to 15 years of retirement or already retired . Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIAs -RRB- are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- more information is available at www.GuaranteedInterest.ca In Canada , variable annuities are called segregated funds or seg funds they are similar to mutual funds . More information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca Immediate annuities provide a guaranteed income stream in exchange for a lump sum premium . They are used as part of a retirement income strategy to provide stability.They are often used to build a guaranteed income to cover fixed expenses . If have assets that are generating interest income and you do not need access to all the capital during your lifetime , the `` insured annuity strategy '' is worth exploring . The objective is to increase your current after tax income while preserving your asset for your heirs . Not for everyone , but the results can be quite dramatic , so it is worth a look . Annuities can also be used to assist in a number of personal and corporate planning strategies , too numerous and complex to be cover here . In Canada , if you are over 65 , income from Interest from a prescribed non-registered annuity qualifies for the $ 2,000 pension tax credit . Note : Interest from a Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also qualifies . GIAs are like Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- but the are issued by insurance companies . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Long term care insurance is not worth the cost if it causes you to cut back on groceries or medication or other essentials needed for a healthy and happy life . If you have very little savings , assets or investments , long term care insurance may also not be worth the cost . If you can afford it , you might want to buy long term care insurance for the options it offers you for your care . However , you would not need it to protect your assets if you do not have assets to protect . Long term care insurance IS worth the cost for those who have a lot to lose if they would have to pay expensive nursing home , assisted living , in home , or other care costs for an extended period of time . It also is worth the cost for those who have strong feelings about being able to pay for the type of care they want , rather than rely on where Medicaid allows .
Is Supplemental Disability Insurance worth it ? That is a great question . If you need almost all your income to support your family 's lifestyle and home , then it certainly could be worth it for you . Group Disability Insurance can end up paying you only 45 % of your income , after taxes , and has restrictive features that a Supplemental Disability Insurance policy will expand upon . Also , Supplemental Disability Insurance can bump the amount you would get paid during a disability to 70 % to 80 % of your income . Finally , Supplemental Disability Insurance is generally portable whereas group DI policies generally are not portable . So purchasing Supplemental Life Insurance while you are still insurable can ensure having Disability coverage for the rest of your life .
Is disability insurance worth having ? The answer depends on the individual . What we 're talking about with disability insurance is paycheck protection . Disability insurance does n't pay for a medical claim , at least not directly . Disability insurance simply creates a pot of money to use as you would with your paycheck . It is up to the individual to decide the worth of protecting their paycheck . Maybe if there 's passive income or massive savings the need for disability insurance may not be that great . But , if you 're not in that position financially , you should think long and hard about disability insurance .
That depends on how long you could live without your paycheck . Long term disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income if you were to become sick or injured and could no longer work . Consider how much your ability to make an income is worth . If you make $ 50,000 per year and assuming you never got another raise and were planning on working for 30 more years , your income would be worth $ 1,500,000 -LRB- $ 50,000 X 30 -RRB- . This about it this way ... if your car is worth $ 15,000 and lets assume you pay $ 100 per month for car insurance . If your income is worth $ 1,500,000 , does n't it make sense to pay $ 100 per month for a long term disability policy to protect that ?
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
Is Life Insurance really worth it ? That depends entirely on the individual involved . For some the idea of protecting their family if they do n't make it home some night is worth a great deal . For others not so much , as it depends on your relationships in life . Even as single young man , I bought life insurance . Why ? cause it was `` worth '' it to me to make sure that my mom could deal with the clean up of the mess I left behind without having to spend the money she worked hard for herself . It was `` worth '' it to me to make a terrible situation that my mom might have to face not a financial hardship at the same time . Later on , it was `` worth '' it to me to have coverage for my wife and kids . This is really a personal answer for each person . I ca n't tell anybody why it 's worth it to them , that has to be their own choice .
Long Term Health Insurance -LRB- known as Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is worth it for some people and not for others . If you have a large amount of savings , investments , and/or property , Long Term Care Insurance can protect your estate by paying for the cost of caring for you if you can not care for yourself . If you have very little in the way of assets , LTCI may not be worth it , as Medicaid would cover the cost of staying in a nursing home . However , whether you have a large estate or not , Long Term Care Insurance does provide some freedom in choosing where you receive your care . And for some people that is worth the price of the insurance .
Whether Long Term Care Insurance is worth the investment depends on how many assets you have to protect . For those who do not have very large estates and who are struggling to make ends meet from month to month , buying Long Term Care Insurance may not make much sense . On the other hand , those who have assets of hundreds of thousands of dollars may find paying a couple hundred of dollars a month for a Long Term Care insurance policy as a good investment . If extended care was needed , their policy would pay for it so that their assets would be safe . The policy would also given them more choices for their care , which some would consider worth the money .
Boy is that the million dollar question of the day ! There are a whole lot of folks asking that same question ... Without knowing your financial status or how near/far into retirement that you are , I can not give you a specific plan of attack , but there are some things that you can start doing immediately that will help . The first is downsize . Move to a smaller house , or less expensive area . Sell off the extra car , unneeded belongings , anything that is no longer really close to your heart , and can generate some cash . Do the same thing with your debt . Tighten the belt and pay off every high interest credit card or loan that you have . Save that interest you 'd be paying for food and electricity . Take the money that you 've found , and invest it in an investment vehicle that will provide you with an income . The second is prioritize . What are you doing that you really could be doing without ? Are you eating out 12 times a week ? Is that more important than saving for your retirement ? Things like lottery tickets , entertainment , take a second and ask yourself if they 're worth the cost . I certainly am not telling you to stop enjoying life , but I 'd ask you to consider if there is a cheaper way to do so -LRB- And lottery tickets I will tell you to stop . You lose far more money than you will ever win -RRB- . The third is to re-evaluate your current savings plan . Can you re-allocate your investments ? Do you have any annuitized investments that you can be assured to not outlive ? Can you shuffle investments that may have under-performed into better ones ? Lastly , are there ways to increase your income ? Can one of you put off taking SSI benefits , -LRB- The longer that you delay the start of the payments , the larger those lifetime payments will be -RRB- , work longer , or use a hobby to generate an income ? If you like gardening , for example , can you grow vegetables to sell , or flowers to arrange for sale ? Using something that you love to do anyway as a secondary source of income is as emotionally rewarding as it is financially rewarding . I hope that there was something in my answer that will help you , have faith . Matthew tells us that God provides for our daily needs , and if you can honestly say that He has done so so far , it 's a safe bet He will continue to . Thanks for asking !
The fact that this is your question is significant . I often ask people to take their picture and go to the internet where they can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When they have the picture , ask the picture what they should do for retirement . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement and if you are thirty there is an awfully good chance that you will spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is best regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the minimum required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That was recently . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
There are several ways to look at that . If you are still living the death benefit is not worth anything currently . But the cash value has a definite worth . The cash surrender value is what most people would consider the worth of you life insurance . But there is also a reduced paid up amount that you could opt for that would possibly be worth more to you .
As mentioned previously , while net worth is a factor , income is the primary determinant for underwriting the amount of life insurance coverage allowed -LRB- applied for plus inforce amounts -RRB- . Above age 70 , net worth is very important in determining maximum coverage allowed . Net worth , income and the premium for the requested coverage are considered together using different formulas . Generally , the maximum total coverage allowed will be 50 % of net worth .
`` Worth '' having something really is based upon one 's own point of view and circumstances . As an insurance professional who is responsible for providing advice and service to my clients , frankly I believe that dollar for dollar , Renters Insurancecan be invaluable and is certainly `` worth '' the cost . Look , you work hard to obtain the things you buy , so obviously , you have already made the decision that these things are `` worth '' having . If you came home one day and your apartment or the house you were renting was completey destroyed and all those personal items that you valued were gone , I suspect you would not be questionning the worth of your renters ' policy .
If you have a critical illness in your future , and will have received a lump sum of money to get you through that process of treatment and -LRB- hopefully -RRB- recovery , you will have thought it is worth it . No one knows the future . To some , having the knowledge that such a benefit would be provided if they are diagnosed with a life threatening illness , is worth it . To others , that is not such a big deal . Whether it is worth getting critical illness insurance or not is really a person decision . That being said , there are many more survivors of critical illnesses now than in the past . So it is a risk worth considering .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Age Is A Classic Car For Insurance ?
This answer will vary from one classic car insurance company to the next . But generally , classic cars need to be at least 25 years old with most companies . Of course , many classic car insurance companies also provide coverage for exotic cars , which do n't have age requirements . There are also some special models that companies will make exceptions for . So it 's important to shop around because companies vary quite a bit with classic cars as far as what they will/won ' t insure .
This answer will vary from one classic car insurance company to the next . But generally , classic cars need to be at least 25 years old with most companies . Of course , many classic car insurance companies also provide coverage for exotic cars , which do n't have age requirements . There are also some special models that companies will make exceptions for . So it 's important to shop around because companies vary quite a bit with classic cars as far as what they will/won ' t insure .
Great Question on classic car insurance . Normally classic car insurance offers limited use on the car or miles so the insurance company has a restriction on the use of the car . You have to have a second car to drive on a daily basis to quality for classic car insurance so that is why the premium is less on that type of insurance .
A `` classic '' car is one that is at least 25 years old . Some companies have other restrictions on classic car insurance , such as number of miles driven in a year , whether it is a show car or a daily driver , and if the car is stored part of the year . The best source of information for the specific vehicle circumstances can be the insurance companies themselves . They have the same general criteria , but each is a little different . The three main classic car insurance companies are : JC Taylor -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- , Hagerty -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- , and Grundy -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- .
As far as the liability , uninsured motorist and medical coverage part of it , it 's about the same as classic car insurance on a regular classic car . But with comprehensive and collision coverage , it can get a little more pricey due to lack of competition . Many classic car insurance companies will not insure a kit car for physical damage coverage , only liability . So you have to look a little harder to find the right companies to quote with .
This answer is personal to me . I offer classic car insurance from many different insurance carriers but the company who really offers a high level of coverage 's and service would be Hagerty in my opinion . Hagerty may not be the best priced in every situation but this is a company that really knows what they are doing when it comes to classic car protection .
Depending on the specific terms and conditions of your policy , it might , but you need to talk this over with your Insurance Professional . Most policies settle losses on an `` Actual Cash Value '' or `` Depreciated Value '' basis meaning that settlement for a total loss would be based upon the book value of the car . Some companies offer optional new car replacement coverage which would then pay for a new car of similar make and model . Other policies , usually covering collector or classic cars will pay based upon an agreed value for the car , in many cases predetermined by an appraisal at the time of application .
This depends upon a couple of factors . First , it depends upon what type of catastrophic payment you selected . The most common type is `` replacement cost '' , which is usually based upon the Kelly Blue Book Value for a vehicle in similar condition . The other option is `` agreed upon value , '' which means your car 's value is estimated by an appraisal and the insurance company will pay out on that value . Replacement cost is common for classic or rare cars . So , if you have replacement cost the best bet to figure out the value of your car is to request a Kelly Blue Book quote . Make sure you give the approximate mileage and condition of your car . I hope this helps .
In most cases a `` classic car '' is ued solely for `` automobile displays '' and is used or driven very little . At some point in the history of this car it has stopped depreciating and has increased in value . For example , the 1955 Thunderbird , the 1957 Chevrolet . We could have bought a stable full of these jewels in 1955 and 1957 for about $ 4000 piece and now they are worth a boat load . These cars obviously require meticulous maintenance and storage standards
Insurance companies , for the most part insure your vehicle to it 's `` Actual Cash Value '' -LRB- AVC -RRB- . That is the starting point . Naturally , the newer the vehicle , the more likely that it will have a higher ACV . Some insurance providers are now offering coverage that will actually replace your car at full value should it be severly damaged in an accident so long as the car was aquired new within three years of the loss . Others extend that coverage to offer an amount necessary to buy a similar year make and model at current market value if damaged within 5 - to -7 years of purchase . Specialty providers for classic or antique cars , boats and motorcycles will insure the vehcle to it 's appraised value at the start so in many cases , you will need to obtain an appraisal when you purchase , much the same as when you buy a diamond engagement ring , for example .
In many cases it will be . This is mostly due to the fact that they are less of a risk b/c they are only driven for shows or on weekends . Companies who insure classic cars may also require that you garage them , as well as agree on value due to the huge disparity between the value as a 50 yr old car vs. to a collector/at auction .
That can vary , but in my experience , as a Nationwide Professional Agent we also represent Hagerty Insurance , one of the most respected companies specializing in this type of coverage , stock vehicles built between 1900 and 1969 are included as classics or antiques . It used to be that a 25 year standard was used , but that is not necessarily the case these days . You may find that cars built as recently as the 1970 's or even ' 80 's may , due to their characteristics , qualify as collector cars .
Depending on the carrier 20years is the averageThat is if you are looking for just a classic car policy which is fairly in expensive . I have ran and sold policies and been as little as 98 a year with full coverage but your not allowed to have any drivers under the age of 25 and it can not be used for regular use on a daily basis but you also can talk to your agent and see if your personal auto policy can add it with different coverages if your are not driving it that much and still keep your costs down
How much do you want ? If you have present and future assets to protect , you will want liability limits in amount to cover them in the event you are sued . Limits of liability in an auto insurance policy are typically available up to $ 1,000,000 . If you are less concerned about protecting your assets and/or are looking only to meet the requirements of your state , limits as low as $ 10,000 or $ 20,000 are available at lower cost . If you have no medical insurance or a medical insurance plan with higher deductibles and/or high co-pays , you may want to consider adding medical coverage to your auto insurance policy , often available up to $ 100,000 . If your car is other than a classic or collecteble car less than 10 years old you may want to include collision coverage for damage incurred in an accident and comprehensive coverage for other types of physical damage , both subject to a deductible you pay 1st , ranging from $ 0 at higher cost to as high as $ 5,000 for lower premium . Should and want are different for different people , so consult your insurance professional for a plan that 's right for you .
This is the classic argument between purchasing whole life insurance for coverage and cash accumulation versus buying term life insurance for coverage and investing the difference -LRB- of what you would have paid into the whole life policy -RRB- to a qualified retirement plan .
There are millions of factors when it comes to your rates from your age to your driving record in Montana you sex makes no difference but in other state if you are a male you are paying higher rates also it depends on the area you live in and how many accidents that are . A classic example would be if you are young and driving a truck and living in the highest rated area your rates could be 400 a month with full coverage but as love as 50 a month with liability only But live in a different area it could be as low as 30 a month . I recommend you contact a local agent who can compare rates with many carriers . Like our agency we answer the 24/7 you may be able to find that in the area you live in
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
I will presume that your question refers to individual health insurance coverage . Now that we are into 2014 and the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- provisions for individual and small group health insurance are fully in effect your freedom of movement as a health insurance buyer is rather severely restricted . Outside of the new annual open enrollment period changing your health insurance carrier in mid-policy year is only allowed under limited circumstances . Change of life status events -LRB- which I have addressed in previous questions on that topic - please see my past answer history -RRB- , financial failure of the health insurance carrier you selected , or defrauding the consumer are virtually the only ways a person can change insurance carriers mid-stream . So , if you got on HealthCare.Gov during the last open enrollment period , purchased a health insurance plan because you liked the monthly premium but did n't bother to do your research and learn that your doctor 's , hospital or pharmacies are n't in-network providers then this is a classic example of `` Let The Buyer Beware '' and you will have to live with your choice until next year 's open enrollment when you can switch carriers . This is why the individual health insurance consumer should seek out the services of a qualified health insurance agent who can explain all the subtle details in today 's health insurance plans that the average consumer could quite possibly miss .
Not in the strictest sense , Medicare Part A , Part B & Part D are not Health Maintenance Organization type plans . Medicare Advantage plans , which have proven increasingly popular since their introduction , generally do embody the concepts of a managed care plan though some can be more oriented towardsa PPO/POS network approach while others embrace the more classic HMO model where their members must use only contracted providers to received their care .
Paid up value in life insurance is a non-forfeiture provision which is found in most classic whole life insurance policies . Non-forfeitureprovisions are a series of values found within a life policy that give you options if you want to stop making premium payments on your policy . These options are : Cash Surrender : Giving up or selling your policy back to the insurance company for the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy over the years you own it . These values are stated on a chart called Non-forfeiture Provisions contained within your policy . Extended Term Insurance : This provides for the continuation of the full face amount of your policy for a specified period of time based on the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy . The length of time is stated in the same chart listed as non-forfeiture provisions . Paid-up Insurance Value : This provision also is included the the chart of Non-forfeiture provisions and it lists the new face amount of insurance you can elect if you stop making premium payments for the policy . It is based on the cash surrender value of the policy at the time you stop making premium payments . Depending on the length of time the policy is in force this amount may equal the full face amount of the policy , and this amount will be in force for the rest of your life . There are policies that can be purchased with a date where the policy is fully paid up , such as a 20 year payment life , or a life paid up at age 65 . Generally these policies spread a lifetime of premium payments over a shorter period of time making the premium payments slightly more than a traditional whole life policy where premium payments are paid for the life of the insured , and are typically known as a limited payment life policy .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Can I Buy A Medicare Supplement Policy ?
Some companies will allow you to purchase a plan up to six months before turning 65 . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement any time during the year , as long as you can qualify health-wise , unless you are in a Medicare Advantage Plan . In that case it would be in your best interest to wait until the Open Enrollment period from October 15th thru December 7th .
You have an automatic guaranteed right to purchase a Medicare supplement policy when you turn 65 or after you have been on Social Security disability income for 2 years . If you worked past 65 and were covered under an employer group health plan , you have an automatic right to purchase a supplement plan when your group coverage ends .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Medicare supplement plans can be purchased at any time . Most will buy a supplement plan when they first turn age 65 and sign up for Medicare Part B . If you purchase a Medicare supplement plan within 6 months of enrolling in Medicare Part B your coverage is `` guaranteed issue '' . There is no open enrollment as such , but there are times when you may purchase a Medicare supplement plan without medical underwriting .
Choosing a Medicare Plan can seem confusing when doing it for the first time . You have several things to consider . First , do you want a Medicare Supplement Plan or a Medicare Advantage plan ? Sometimes , people like to compare plans online first just to get an idea and they can do that on our website . However , it is important to also to speak with an independent agent that can explain the pros and cons of each plan and how that plan may fit your needs the best . You will always be able to tell a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- or a Medigap Plan -RRB- because they have a letter like Plan F or Plan G , etc. . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is actually great health insurance . Some of the great things about a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is : 1 . No Network - you can go to any doctor or hospital you want . If they take Medicare , they take the supplement . 2 . No referral needed to go to a specialist . 3 . Once you have a plan , the benefits on that plan can not change from year to year . 4 . No large out of pocket surprises when you go to the doctor or hospital
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : What is supplemental life insurance ? Supplemental life insurance can be extra insurance that you have above and beyond either your group plan at work or individually-purchased life insurance . If you purchased this and you need more , some people look at supplemental life insurance to augment what they already have . You may want to look at this in 2 ways '' ` Would I like to have more coverage or would I like to have a supplemental retirement income plan , an extra cash value contract , that can generate withdrawals to basis and policy loans to gain tax-free , as long as I keep the policy in force for the life of the policy insured ? ' If I 'm looking at it as a supplemental income play or I 'm looking at it as a supplemental death benefit , supplemental life insurance can be a great adjunct to what I already have , either by group or by my individual purchase .
There are specified `` guarantee issue '' situations where a supplemental Medicare insurance carrier can not refuse coverage . Most people will buy a Medicare supplement plan at the same time they enroll in Medicare Part A and Part B which is usually when they turn 65 . If you buy a supplement plan then , you can not be denied . Other guaranteed issue periods include exercising your trial right when leaving a Medicare Adantage plan , losing your Advantage plan coverage by moving out of the service area and if your current Medigap carriar goes out of business or stops writing your plan .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Can A Roth IRA Go Into A Trust ?
The short answer is `` it depends on the type of Trust '' . If you are inquiring about a Revocable Living Trust the answer is `` yes '' . Spend the money and consult with a tax advisor who understands trusts and a financial advisor who understands trusts to get the most accurate answer . Best to you , Mark
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 70 1/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 59 1/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 59 1/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 70 1/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 59 1/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
A Roth IRA isnt better . A Roth IRA is different . Contributions for a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- reduce your current income tax . Contributions to a Roth IRA do not . Distributions from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are fully taxable as ordinary income . Distributions from a Roth IRA are not taxable at all . The limits to how much you can put into a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are quite generous . The limits to contributions to a Roth IRA are restrictive . There are taxes and possible penalties if you withdraw money from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- prior to age 59.5 . You can withdraw from the capital invested from a Roth IRA without tax consequences . There are advantages to both .
A Roth IRA is not related to etrade in any direct way unless you simply have your Roth IRA as part of your etrade account . Let 's look at the basic definitions . A Roth IRA is an Individual Retirement Arrangement -LRB- see IRS Publication 590 -RRB- that is generally not taxed if you meet certain conditions . Your Roth IRA can contain a wide variety of financial products including stocks , bonds , mutual funds , CDs , annuities and much more . Etrade is generally considered an online discount stock brokerage service for self-directed investors . You can open a Roth IRA at thousands of institutions . One of those financial institutions is etrade . Whether that would be `` good '' is largely dependent on you and your choices of how you invest your Roth IRA funds .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 59 1/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 59 1/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
There are several rules that determine your eligibility to open a Roth IRA . 1 -RRB- You must first have an income . Did you have earned income in the current tax year ? 2 -RRB- If you earned income , did your income exceed the limits set by the federal government ? This income limit changes every year and is depends on your marital status and tax filing status to determine the maximum income . You qualify for a Roth IRA based upon your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You can not contribute more into a Roth IRA than you earned in income . For example , if you earned $ 5,000 for 2014 , that is your maximum contribution . 4 -RRB- The contribution limit in 2014 was $ 5,500 maximum . 5 -RRB- There is no maximum age where you are limited or prohibited from making a contribution to a Roth IRA . 6 -RRB- You are not required to take a mandatory distribution at age 70.5 like qualified IRA 's . 7 -RRB- You can contribute to a Roth IRA even if you participate in a retirement plan at work . Depending on circumstances there may be other rules but this gives you a few ideas .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
If you have a traditional IRA , anyone can convert to a Roth IRA . He is the rub however , because the traditional IRA is tax-deferred and the ROTH IRA is pre-taxed , you will have to pay taxes on the amount you with to convert to the Roth . There may be strategies available which can help you to pay for that tax , through bonus which may be received on certain Fixed Indexed Annuities . If you are considering Converting a traditional IRA into a Roth , I recommend you call your adviser or reach out to me .
Individual retirement accounts -LRB- IRA -RRB- are allowed under the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The primary difference between a Roth IRA and a regular IRA is when money is taxed . Deposits in a regular IRA are deductible from current income tax ; deposits to a Roth IRA are not . In both cases the interest earned on the accounts is not currently taxable . When all the necessary conditions are met , withdrawals from a regular IRA are taxed as earned income in the year received . Withdrawals from the Roth IRA are free of any income tax . There are other differences that affect estate planning and required distributions .
Is a rollover IRA a Roth IRA ? Well , no . Really two different things going on here . You ca n't rollover an IRA into a Roth plan without paying taxes on the transaction . In other words you have to cash your IRA out , pay taxes and then you could possibly put them in a Roth . A rollover IRA usually means moving funds from one to another similar plans . Usually , there are no tax consequences for a rollover .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Geico Have Homeowners Insurance ?
Geico is a National Automobile Insurance provider ; the insurance company does not underwrite Home Insurance . However , they have a wholly owned subsidiary insurance agency which brokers out home insurance to other insurance companies . Since you will not receive a multi lines policy from an insurance company if your home and auto are not with the same carrier ; you would be better informed if you were to purchase the auto insurance from Geico and purchase the home insurance directly from a discount home insurance company . An online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online has been discovered ; it may be used by Escrow Professionals , Mortgage Professionals and directly by Consumers . This link is an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
Geico does not actually insure Renters or Homeowners . Geico partners with other insurance companies like Travelers and ASI who provide the insurance . Geico claims to cut out the middle man but that 's simply not true . Geico is an independent agency just like every local agency in your community . Geico just spends a tremendous amount of money to convince the public they are the cheapest and the best . It 's simple not true .
Geico does not write Homeowners insurance . If you have your Auto insurance with Geico , they will typically offer you a Homeowners quote through Geico General Agency and the insurance company they use is Travelers Ins . Co. . They do this so that you can receive a Multi-policy discount . I hope this answered your question .
In answer to your question here , unless someone has knowledge to the contrary , Geico backs Geico homeowner policies . Even though Geico is a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway , the Company of which Mr. Warren Buffett is Chairman , the Geico Corporation is licensed to do business in all States and would pay claims under the Geico name .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Geico does not sell life insurance originated within their own company . If you attempt to get a life insurance quote from Geico 's website it will take you to another agency . Geico says on their website that life insurance policies are written through non affiliated companies and secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. .
Geico does not write homeowners insurance themselves . However , they do offer it as an agent for other companies . So , if you call Geico , they can get you homeowners coverage but it will be with a different company . My advice is to find a local agent you trust who will actually sit down with you and coordinate all your coverages . As much as some companies will try to convince you that all insurance is the same , I assure you it 's not . It takes time and careful consideration to put together insurance coverages that will protect you and your family correctly . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . You 'll save money and aggravation in the long run .
Geico is really two entities . One is the insurance company that provides auto and vehicle coverage . The other is the Geico insurance agency . They are simply like any other independent agency in that they represent other companies through which they place insurance . This is what Geico does with life insurance . If you purchase life insurance with them , it will be placed with a different company . That does n't necessarily make it bad . It 's most likely a company that many independents write through . My advice is to find the right agent . One you can trust to do the best thing for you and your family , not just the cheapest option . Then listen to him/her and take their advice . You 'll come out ahead in the long run .
Geico offers Term Life Insurance through non-affiliated insurance companies . In other words , the life insurance is not underwritten by Geico ; Geico just helps you get it by referring you to a brokerage that carries quotes from multiple life insurance companies . The agency they refer you to is not owned by Geico .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does Geico have life insurance ? Most of you know that Geico is a property casualty insurance company , and of course they have the gecko as their advertising mascot . They outsource all their life insurance applications off their web to an outside vendor , so they do n't really manufacture term life insurance nor do the manufacture permanent life insurance . So when you 're looking for life insurance and you 're one of their actual policy holders in property casualty , a lot of times you 'll stay within that agency and you 'll go ahead and purchase other insurances like life insurance . If you 're looking for life insurance , you may want to also look online at different brokerage houses to see if their price tags are any better than what Geico is offering .
Geico does write home insurance as a broker but not as an insurer . This means that you can work with a Geico representative to purchase a home policy and they can even service the policy , but that policy is actually written through another carrier . If you have a home policy through Geico you can find out who the insurer by reviewing the policy declarations page .
Geico acts as both an insurance company and an insurance agency for other insurance carriers . Although Geico is known for their Direct Auto Insurance Policies , Geico Home Insurance is offered by Stillwater Insurance Group . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Geico life insurance is written through non-affiliated life insurance companies and is secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. . Therefore , Geico offers life insurance from a number of different life insurance companies at a variety of prices . You can get free life insurance quotes from any number of websites . By choosing one that gives `` instant '' quotes you will get your rates without having to talk to anyone .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Let me share my experience.I 'm a licensed fee-based -LRB- accept no commissions -RRB- insurance consultant who has studied insurance , obtained a number of industry designations , owned and operated a general insurance agency for nearly forty years and helped thousands of insurance consumers with their insurance questions . I have long harbored ill will toward GEICO and other insurers who chose not to do business with independent agents . I believe their sales staff -LRB- and that of other insurers selling direct to the public -RRB- are trained to sell what the insurer wants to sell ; not what the consumer really needs . But I recently sought to purchase auto insurance for myself and checked out a number of on-line insurance offerings . GEICO 's premiums were one third of those indicated by E-surance , Progressive , and several others . The application process and live discussion with a sales person was cordial , professional and non-threatening . I was able to access my coverage information on-line , pay premiums directly and obtain insurance cards.Actually my experience was better than any I 've had with any independent agent . My conclusion , it is still important to know what you need and want . It is you against a large insurer and that means be cautious . But for my money I certainly would consider GEICO as an insurer.If nothing else they deserve a look .
Unfortunately , Geico does not carry Disability Insurance . Geico mainly carries property-casualty insurance , including home , condo , co-op , mobile home , flood , and renter 's insurance ; auto , commercial auto , collector car , motorcycle , ATV , boat , water craft , snowmobile , and umbrella insurance ; overseas and business insurance ; identity theft insurance ; and life insurance from an outside source .
Geico has very good homeowner 's insurance . There rates are usually very competitive in most areas of the US . When you purchase their auto insurance , you will receive a multi-policy discount , that will lower the premium on both auto and home policies . Their policies cover the dwelling , personal property , liability and all of the mandated coverages every other carrier offers . You can also purchase other lines of policies as well . Geico handles claims very efficiently , and their quotes can be provided by experienced brokers or their websites .
GEICO or Government Employees Insurance Companyper se does not underwrite a life insurance , it is primarily a property and casualty company focused on auto , boats , motorcycles , RVs , etc. . You may find that agents that sell GEICO products offer life insurance but through other life insurance companies or will refer the life insurance business out to other carriers .
end question
start question
annuities
Will Annuity Rates Increase In 2014 ?
No one has a crystal ball nor the market clairvoyance to predict economic conditions of interest rates in the future . The only consideration is that there are historical trends , which can never be used as a predicable indicator . But they suggest that prolonged low interest rates generally give way to higher interest rates . The recent up tick in 10 year Treasuries may suggest the beginning of such a trend . Many advisers , who sell tax deferred fixed interest rate annuities are recommending short term policies in the present environment .
Prior to 2014 it was reasonable to anticipate annual increases in group and individual health insurance in the high single digits to low teen 's range . Though , of course , these are just generalized averages and a host of other factors could move rates higher or , in rarer instances , lower . We have already seen the base cost of health insurance increase fairly substantially in 2014 due to the implementation of the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . The effect was especially pronounced in the individual health insurance market of almost every state due to the mandatory addition of new benefits , the move to the community rating approach , the elimination of underwriting and adjusting rates for risk , and making all policies guaranteed to be issued without pre-existing condition limitations or exclusions . In mid-2014 we are just now beginning to receive health insurance companies filings for their proposed 2015 rates . While the rate filings vary from state to state and from insurance carrier to insurance carrier , individual health insurance rate increases in the teens to 25 % or more are being reported in many areas across the nation . In some limited instances though , you are seeing some filings requesting rate reductions but these are pretty rare . Therefore , most people should be prepared to see their rates for individual health insurance increase meaningfully again in 2015 , though this effect may be hidden to some extent for those persons who qualify for premium tax subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Many small business groups are also seeing substantial rate increases in their renewal actions for the 2014-2015 benefit year . Increases of 20 % to 40 % are not uncommon .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Starting Jan. 1st , 2014 , the tax penalty for not having health insurance is $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- up to 3 persons max per household , and where dependents under 21 count as half a person -RRB- or 1 % of annual income , whichever is greater . But , for the Initial Open Enrollment Period , you have from Oct. 1st , 2013 to March 31st , 2014 to sign up for a plan to avoid the penalty ... For example , a family of 4 or more , would only pay a max of $ 285 in 2014 -LRB- $ 95 x 2 adults = $ 190 , plus 2 children at $ 47.50 = $ 95 , for a total of $ 285 -RRB- . But , for a single individual , they would most likely pay the 1 % of income , up to the $ 285 max -LRB- i.e. a single 33yr old with $ 22,000 annual income would pay 1 % or $ 220 for the year , because $ 220 is greater than the $ 95 per person and below the $ 285 max household -RRB- . After 2014 the tax penalty increases to $ 325 in 2015 , or 2 % of income up to $ 975 max -LRB- 3x $ 325 -RRB- . Followed by $ 695 in 2016 , or 2.5 % of income up to $ 2,085 max -LRB- 3x $ 695 -RRB- ; and then adjusted to Cost of Living Increases thereafter . Also , the penalty can be prorated . So , if you are only uninsured for 1 month out of the year where a penalty would be applied , you would only pay one month 's worth of penalties -LRB- i.e. For 2014 , if you miss one month you would pay $ 95/12 = $ 7.92 per person , or 1 % of your income/12 -RRB- . And due to the application processes and effective dates for insurance , one day of being uninsured , equals one month . So , be very aware of when you apply for insurance and when it will take effect . It 's best to work with an insurance agent or broker , and an accountant , to calculate the exact tax implications for your individual situation ; to assure that you are indeed responsible to pay the tax or if you are exempt from it .
The challenge to answering the question `` Will annuities increase ? '' is that the answer depends on the context of the question . I will provide an answer for different situations and if you would like further clarification you can contact me . In Canada , there are basically two type of annuities , immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities provide an income in exchange for a lump sum . With a deferred annuity , the income is in the future , Deferred annuities are often used as an accumulation or investment vehicle . When the investment options are guaranteed , it is similar to a guaranteed investment certificate , GIC , and could increase through interest growth . In Canada , variable deferred annuities are often referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . These are similar to mutual funds and their value can increase or decrease depending on the fund -LRB- s -RRB- performance . Since they are issued by insurance companies , seg funds do offer minimum death and maturity guarantees , typically 75 % or 100 % . Some companies also offer resets or the locking in of gains , the full details of which are outlined in the plan 's information folder . One major factor in determining the income provided from immediate guaranteed annuities is long term interest rates . If rates increase , the amount of income provided will also increase . The income from an immediate annuity can also increase after issue depending on the terms of the contact . An indexed annuity for example can provide for an increase in income each year . Another option would have part of the income dependent on the performance of a fund or pool of funds , where the income would increase or decrease depending on the funds ' performance . This is a basic overview of a potentially complex subject . Do not take any action without consulting a licensed professional . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Starting Jan. 1st , 2014 , the tax penalty for not having health insurance is $ 95 per person for the year , up to 3 persons max per household and where dependents under 21 count as half a person ; or 1 % of annual income , whichever is greater ... So , a family of 4 or more , would only pay a max of $ 285 in 2014 -LRB- $ 95 x 2adults = $ 190 , plus 2 children at $ 47.50 = $ 95 , for a total of $ 285 -RRB- . But , for a single individual non-dependent , they would most likely pay the 1 % of income , up to the $ 285 max -LRB- i.e. a single 33yr old with $ 22,000 annual income would pay 1 % or $ 220 for the year , because $ 220 is greater than the $ 95 per person and below the $ 285 max household -RRB- . After 2014 the tax penalty increases to $ 325 in 2015 , or 2 % of income up to $ 975 max -LRB- 3x $ 325 -RRB- . Followed by $ 695 in 2016 , or 2.5 % of income up to $ 2,085 max -LRB- 3x $ 695 -RRB- ; and then adjusted to Cost of Living Increases thereafter . Also , the penalty can be prorated . So , if you are only uninsured for 1 month out of the year where a penalty would be applied , you would only pay one month 's worth of penalties -LRB- i.e. For 2014 , if you miss one month you would pay $ 95/12 = $ 7.92 per person , or 1 % of your income/12 -RRB- . And due to the application processes and effective dates for insurance , one day of being uninsured , equals one month . So , be very aware of when you apply for insurance and when it will take effect . It 's best to work with an insurance agent or broker , and an accountant , to calculate the exact tax implications for your individual situation ; to assure that you are indeed responsible to pay the tax or if you are exempt from it .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
Estimates of the numbers of uninsured Americans have always varied widely depending upon the definitions used . As of June of 2014 and the completion of the first open enrollment period for ObamaCare a firm count on the numbers of insured and uninsured Americans is yet to be announced . After all the effort , expense and turmoil associated with the passage and implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- the initial indications are that we have slightly reduced the number of uninsured Americans . A poll released in April , 2014 indicates that the uninsured rate declined from a peak of approximately 18 % in the summer of 2013 -LRB- which was the high point since the start of the recession in 2008 - the overall average uninsured rate for the 2008 through 2013 period was more in the 16 % to 16.5 % range -RRB- to approximately 15.6 % at the end of the first quarter of 2014 . This represented about a 1.5 % decrease in the uninsured population from January 1 , 2014 -LRB- 17.1 % -RRB- to the end of March , 2014 and our uninsured rate remains above the level that existed before the 2008 financial crisis . Assuming that we have a population of approximately 320 million in the United States , my math would indicate that leaves close to 50 million uninsured Americans . The number I hear and see used most often states that there are still more than 30 million Americans without health insurance . I ca n't reconcile the different numbers but what is clear is that our efforts to insure every American have fallen significantly short ofthe stated objective .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years .
No one will be able to give you a perfect answer to this question until we have 2015 in the rear view mirror . Health insurance costs have always varied from state to state and ObamaCare has made the contrast between states quite stark in some cases . Combine this with the fact that how individual health insurance products were designed , rated and sold all underwent the biggest simultaneous change in the industry 's history and you have a situation where the entire health insurance marketplace has been turned upside down and we have a very foggy situation . In general terms , most individual consumers should anticipate at least a 10 % increase in their 2015 rates and be prepared to shop their coverage . Your results in your state may be quite different and it is not uncommon for some people to be receiving significantly higher rates increases . Rate filings for 2015 paint a confusing picture . Some state 's are reporting very moderate 2015 rate changes but those were also often the same states whose 2014 rates jumped the most . So , perhaps these state 's overpriced in year 1 of ObamaCare and the fact that they were only slightly off even then is n't exactly cause for cheer . Other states are seeing much higher rate increases for 2015 . Another factor complicating the cost picture are the government health insurance marketplaces themselves . Because of government administrative policies , the insurance carrier who has the second lowest cost Silver level product in each marketplace sets the bar for the amount that the government 's premium subsidy will be calculated to support . Owning this price point is a key competitive placement for the health insurance carriers in the marketplace . In year 1 this pricing position was usually held by a Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan or a national insurance carrier . In year 2 , many of year 1 's benchmark plans are now priced higher and have been replaced by a new plan and/or insurance carrier as the benchmark silver plan . And , in several states , the price leading plans in year 2 are experimental creations of ObamaCare called Co-Ops . These are non-profit programs that fill the role of a health insurance plan but are initially funded with Federal grant dollars . The year 1 track record of the Co-Op plans was mixed at best . Their year 2 positioning indicates a move to buy up market share quickly as the Federal grant dollars have a limited life span . Whether these experiments will be able to quickly develop the skills , financial reserves and enrollment base to allow them to survive independently is highly debatable .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
In the big picture sense , Yes , health insurance rates are going up for the 2015 plan year . As always there are winners and losers in every rating cycle and the implementation of the health insurance marketplaces in 2014 totally reset the pricing dynamics in virtually every state . So , an individual group 's experience or an individual person 's experience with their health insurance rates for 2015 may vary substantially from the overall national trends . And in some ways it is difficult to make apples-to-apples comparisons of a person or group 's pre and post-Obamacare rating and benefit positions because the basic changes to health insurance rating have been so fundamental in the individual and small group marketplaces . Also , I 'll let you in on a secret . Health insurance rates will be higher in 2016 than they were in 2015 . It has been this way for the 30 years of my career and the health care reform law did virtually nothing to address healthcare costs only to increase insured access to healthcare . So , the trend of increasing costs on a year over year basis should be anticipated to continue for the foreseeable future .
Grandfather status applies to health insurance plans that have been in force before ACA -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- was passed in March of 2010 . In order to maintain Grandfather status , you must keep the same plan and have no changes made to it since . Any change in deductible or plan type would cause you to loose grandfather status . Is it important ? It depends on what your view of the future is . One side believes grandfather status is important and should be kept if possible . When the health care exchanges open in 2014 , those who are grandfathered will not be required to carry all the new required coverages ACA mandates . Others feel grandfather status is a gimmick and people will eventually lose it . After March of 2010 , no one else could get grandfather status . So that group of people -LRB- insurance policies -RRB- has no new people coming into it to help offset the increase claims that come with age . That grandfathered group of policies will start to see rates increase as claims increase . The healthy will likely drop grandfather status and go to the exchanges . This leaves even fewer health people to offset those who are sick on the grandfather pool , thus cause additional rate increases until everyone on grandfather status drops that coverage . How long that will take is up to debate and will like play out over time . Will it take 3 years or 6 year or more ; no one knows . If you are unsure if you have grandfather status , call your health insurance company and ask . They will be able to tell you .
The best way to get deductions on your taxes using health insurance is to purchase a HIGH Deductible Health Plan -LRB- HDHP -RRB- and open a health savings account -LRB- HSA -RRB- with it . The money you put in the HSA over the coarse of the year is tax deductible with the following limits : $ 3300 - Individual 2014 $ 3300 + $ 1000 - Individual 2014 -LRB- 55 + Contribution -RRB- $ 6550 - Family 2014 $ 6550 + $ 1000 - Family 2014 -LRB- 55 + Contribution -RRB- To learn more about HSA coverage visit CLM Insurance Group
Well I have to admit it sure seems like it sometimes but auto insurance does not increase every year . There are many variable factors that come into play into an auto insurance rate . For example , driving record , types of vehicles , marital status , where you live and more . However for the sake of argument lets assume all factors remain stagnant and the rate still increases . The insurance industry flows through what we call hard and soft markets . A soft market is when insurance carriers are showing a profit , loss ratios are good and investments are performing . A hard market is when profits are down , loss ratios are high and investments are performing under expectation . It is more of a constant guessing game for the insurance carriers to operate a business and keep their heads above water . If losses continue and profits are down an insurance carrier will make a necessary adjustment to remain solvent by increasing rates . Rate changes can be local or regional depending on performance in any given area . If the market turns around and profits increase the carriers will then loosen up into what we call a softer marketopeningthe doors to more potential clients by lowering the rates again . Cycles usually run for several years before they shift one way or the other simply due to the time it takes to gather loss information and process it . I will give you an example of some recent trends . During the dot com era insurance companies were performing very well and rates were down . The market crashed and rates began increasing due to poor market performance and increased losses . Carriers got a handle on the situation and things seemed to be going well for the next couple of years and rates actually dipped a little , but now it seems we are back at an upswing . If someone was paying $ 500.00 for a 6 month policy that dropped to $ 450.00 for a year they were happy . But then a year later went to $ 475.00 from the consumers point of view this is a rate increase forgetting just two years back they may have been paying $ 500.00 . Again sometimes this type of movement is difficult to see since variables come into play such as moving to a new location , adding or changing cars , adding drivers and so on . I hope that helped at least explain alittlebit on how the insurance industry operates .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Go Down When You Turn 18 ?
That is a great question ! In most cases , the answer will lie in your company 's policies , your driving record , and where you live . The most risky age group for insurers is that 16-25 year old group , and as a result , the rate increases and decreases can vary quite a bit . Your best bet ? Call your agent and ask . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
The rating structure used by an insurance company is approved and supervised by the state insurance commissioner . That means that it varies from state to state . Here in California we rate based on experience . Any driver with less than 4 years of experience is charged more than one with more experience regardless of their age .
Not really ... It all depends on the carrier you are with , but with our carriers we do n't see a significant price break at age 18 . We see a more significant break in the mid 20 's . Many carriers consider those that are 18 , 19 or in the eraly 20 's and still being `` young '' drivers and price them accordingly . Every year you get further away from the true young driver age of 16 or 17 , you get a little help onthe pricing but its not generally a lot to get excited about . Contact your local independant agent and have them run some pricing comaprisons for with different companies . If you are 17 now , ask them to run estimates on what your premiums -LRB- at today 's rates -RRB- may look like as you get older .
Many companies will reduce your auto insurance rates when you turn 18 , 19 , 21 , 25 or other specific ages . Also , the number of years of driver 's experience will help reduce premiums . For example , if you get your license at age 16 , within 2-3 years , you should see rate reductions if your driving record remains good . Of course , in fairness , there are other variables that can impact the rate .
Yes , a person under 18 can be the beneficiary of a life insurance policy . You should have provisions set up in your will to designate a guardian/trust to control the funds until he/she is old enough to claim them , otherwise a judge will decide who will be given guardianship.A life insurance trustcan be very useful in this instance if you want to control how and when the proceeds are paid out . Many times , a parent may want their child 's access to the monies be given in installments -LRB- e.g. giving a quarter of it to them when they turn 18 , a quarter when they turn 21 , a quarter when they turn 25 , and a quarter when they turn 30 -RRB- to make sure that the monies last and are not spend unwisely .
This is a very complicated subject . In California all the drivers in a household are included on an auto policy . Parents dont want the additional expense of insuring their cars with an inexperienced driver in the household . Some purchase a car and place the car in the 18 year olds name . They then buy the cheapest auto insurance with just the bare legal limits . The problem arises when the inexperienced driver injures others in an accident and the injured party starts suing . The lawyers will not stop at the limits of the policy purchased for the 18 year old . I have seen them even go after grandparents who loaned money to the 18 year old . Your only recourse is the low limit policy purchased for the car . The rest of the lawsuit comes after everything that you own . It is usually cheaper to include the inexperienced driver on the family policy . If you add another car you can isolate the expense to that car but at least you can have the advantages of discounts and perhaps save yourself from bankruptcy down the road .
Well that is a question for which the best answer is that it depends . Most carriers use rate differential on age . There is a much higher correlation of accidents involving youthful operators than with drivers who are more mature.Having said that , there are then refinements in each carrier 's rate methodology to develop the proper rate for them for the exposure presented . That often means that there are millions and millions of possible price points for an insurer in any given state . So , some insurers will define operators under age 25 uniformly or they may adjust at each age between licensing age -LRB- usually 16 -RRB- and the age of 25 . Some carriers further refine this with segmentation down to six month increments , so some one is 18 and one half might have a lower rate then someone who as just turned 18 . The best advice I can give you is visit with an independent agent who represents many companies so you can really compare for yourself and your situation .
Full coverage auto insurance for an 18 year-old can vary , depending on many factors . For example , the type of vehicle , and driving record of the teenager will greatly influence the rate . If the car is financed , the type of coverage will be different which will impact the cost . Finding the lowest rare is critical so you do n't overpay . As an experienced broker -LRB- with 33 years of experience -RRB- , we manage a top-rated website -LRB- see profile -RRB- that offers free online quotes . In moments , consumers can view the cheapest car insurance rates for an 18-year old . Another important factor is that often , when you turn 19 , insurers will discount the rate , especially if you have three years of driving experience . The price reduction could be substantial , A good-student discount -LRB- if you are in school -RRB- , will also reduce premiums , often by hundreds of dollars .
Yes , you can turn down Medicare . If you are automatically enrolled in Medicare , you will receive a form in your packet that you can simply return to turn down Medicare Part B due to being in a group plan . You will need to contact your Social Security office to discuss the ramifications of turned down Medicare Part A . But you can turn down Part A , as well .
Yes , you can turn down Medicare . However , with no premium for Medicare Part A , and in consideration of the valuable health care that it provides , one should give very careful consideration before turning down Part A. Part B is not needed if you are still working and receiving group health insurance , so it can be turned down and picked up later . Again , to turn it down permanently , first look hard at the benefit it provides , and the alternatives , before making that decision .
There are a number of reasons to be turned down for life insurance . I have elaborated on them in my article here , along with ways to avoid or correct each problem : WEBSITELINK In summary , they are : 1 -RRB- The product does not cover your health condition or other risk factor -LRB- such as suspended drivers license , recent bankruptcy , dangerous hobby -RRB- 2 -RRB- Your application is incomplete and no one points it out to you 3 -RRB- Something is in your medical records that you are unaware of , that causes you to be declined 4 -RRB- The underwriter asks for more medical records and no one provides them 5 -RRB- You have done everything right but your health does not meet the qualifications Being turned down is a frustrating , heart wrenching experience . You can lessen your chances of being turned down by using an agent or agency that understands your health and risk factors and puts you with the correct product to start with , then follows the underwriting process closely to make sure it is completed properly . Sometimes , though , in trying to get the best price , declines do happen . It is not the end of the world . There is usually something else out there for you . Find yourself an agent who vows to stay the course with you until you get what you need .
Many companies will reduce your auto insurance rates when you turn 18 , 19 , 21 , 25 or other specific ages . Also , the number of years of driver 's experience will help reduce premiums . For example , if you get your license at age 16 , within 2-3 years , you should see rate reductions if your driving record remains good . Of course , in fairness , there are other variables that can impact the rate .
That 's a tricky question . Yes , but it would have to be put into a trust for the minor until that child turns 18 . It does n't mean they do n't have access to the money , they would just have to go through their guardian until they reach the legal age that would allow them to pull from the trust .
You can be turned down for a Medigap Policy . If you are in your Open Enrollment Period -LRB- new to Medicare -RRB- or if you can qualify for Guarantee Issue you can not be turned down regardless of your health . If you are not in Open Enrollment or Guarantee Issue you have to answer all health questions on the application so the insurance company can determine if you qualify medically for their Medigap Policy . If you have serious health conditions you can be turned down or you could be charged a much higher premium for the coverage because of the pre-existing health conditions .
There are a few things you need to be aware of . First , if your over 18 , you have to sign the application for life insurance . If it was purchased prior then your signature is not required . When the policy was issued , there was a payor identified other than yourself . If he turns the ownership over to you , then you have to decide if you want it . If you do n't , then you do not have to pay pay for it however be aware the policy will lapse . Find a local broker to look at your current policy if you are not sure what you have and what the options are .
Unfortunately , some people are turned down for life insurance for very simple reasons because they did not sign up for the appropriate policy to start with . To avoid being turned down , be sure to read the guidelines very carefully . It is far better to converse with an agent to be sure you did not overlook something . E.g. . Some policies require that you have a drivers license ; some do n't . Some require that you are a US citizen ; some do n't . Some allow a certain policy to cover people with diabetes ; some do n't . Those type of declines are easy to avoid by just talking to tan agent . Other declines are more complicated . You may have a history of depression that sounds OK , but then get declined because your doctor wrote something in your medical records of which you were unaware . With any kind of health history or risk factors such as past alcohol treatment , use an impaired risk specialist to lower your chance of being turned down . There are policies out there for nearly everyone if you know where to look .
No , enrollment in Part B Medicare is not mandatory . Some people put off enrolling in Medicare Part B until the next enrollment period -LRB- or more -RRB- after their 65th birthday because they are receiving good health insurance through the group plan offered at their place of employment . If you are enrolled in Part B Medicare automatically when you turn age 65 , you can turn it down . But do know the consequences of turning down Part B beforehand .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes a minor child can be a life insurance proceeds beneficiary . If you plan to make the minor child the primary beneficiary , you should take these steps as well . You should have a will in place to name a trust or legal guardian to hold and disperse the funds until the child turns 18 years old . Otherwise a probate judge will decide the child 's guardianship . That court appointed guardian will disperse the funds .
It depends on the reason for the policy . Most people will select a spouse , parent or other family member . If the policy is for final expenses you can name the person who will be handling those affairs or even the funeral home . I do not recommend naming a child as beneficiary unless the money is earmarked for the child after he or she turns 18 . Money left to the child will be held in trust until the child is of legal age .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Can I Get Life Insurance Online In New Jersey ?
Buying life insurance online in New Jersey simply involves finding an online insurance agency that does business in the state of New Jersey . You can find such resources by searching on line for agencies or agents who do business in New Jersey . You will find several places from which you can purchase life insurance online .
Find a website that provides instant online life insurance quotes - without having to provide any personal information . If you find favorable rates you may be able to fill out an application with the same online life insurance agency . An agent will follow up to ensure accuracy of the application and help answer any questions . You may need a medical exam , but it does not require much time . Being able to buy life insurance online in New Jersey or any other state has never been easier .
To get Life Insurance online in New Jersey , go to a website that offers life insurance in your state . You can input your date of birth in an `` instant '' quote engine to see if a quote comes up for New Jersey , look for a site that offers life insurance in all 50 states , or put your zip code where requested . Once you get the quote . the online agency will guide you through the rest of the process . It is different for different types of policies and different companies . But in the end you have a policy just as if you had walked into a life insurance office , and you will not have had to drive anywhere or have someone in your home to purchase it .
To get Life Insurance online in New Jersey , go to a website that offers life insurance in your state . You can input your date of birth in an `` instant '' quote engine to see if a quote comes up for New Jersey , look for a site that offers life insurance in all 50 states , or put your zip code where requested . Once you get the quote . the online agency will guide you through the rest of the process . It is different for different types of policies and different companies . But in the end you have a policy just as if you had walked into a life insurance office , and you will not have had to drive anywhere or have someone in your home to purchase it .
Buying life insurance online in New Jersey simply involves finding an online insurance agency that does business in the state of New Jersey . You can find such resources by searching on line for agencies or agents who do business in New Jersey . You will find several places from which you can purchase life insurance online .
The answer will depend on your individual and family circumstances , objectives and resources . If you are a Breadwinner , or a stay at home parent in New Jersey chances are your significant other will be greatly impacted financially due to an untimely death . Some life insurance protection is better than none especially if you have dependents , or loved ones who are relying on your future income . Some options for life insurance in New Jersey are Group Life Insurance which may be offered by your employer , or an industry association . This is not to say group life is the best in New Jersey , it is just one of a few options . Other considerations are individual term life insurance , or permanent life insurance like whole life , universal life , variable life and indexed universal life .
Find a website that provides instant online life insurance quotes - without having to provide any personal information . If you find favorable rates you may be able to fill out an application with the same online life insurance agency . An agent will follow up to ensure accuracy of the application and help answer any questions . You may need a medical exam , but it does not require much time . Being able to buy life insurance online in New Jersey or any other state has never been easier .
To apply for Medicare Part D in New Jersey , a good website to go to is : WEBSITELINK . There you will find some Medicare Part D plans to enroll in and how to enroll in Medicare Part D plans in New Jersey . They also provide a phone number where you can contact them to enroll in Medicare Part D.
The states that require Short Term Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York and Rhode Island . A few states offer disability to low income citizens in others ways . California , New Jersey and Rhode Island offer state Disability Insurance or Temporary State Disability Insurance . Puerto Rico also offers a Public Temporary Disability Insurance plan .
Auto insurance in New jersey will vary quite a bit , depending on your age , zip code , types of vehicles you drive and of course , how many tickets and accidents are on your driving record . An experienced broker can quickly compare the best offers from the major carriers so you can save money . You can also view prices online from top-rated companies .
There is no one type of life insurance policy , or one particular life insurance company , that is best in New Jersey . Finding your best policy will take into account your health , age , income , the amount of life insurance that you need , and the purpose for your coverage . It may be a good idea to visit with an agency that sells life insurance in New Jersey to find the best policy for you .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The desire to have Renters Insurance is one that varies in different geographic areas ; the decision to purchase Renters Insurance is either due to sense of responsibility , the requirement by the Landlord or both ! The mostaffordable Renters Insurance in New Jersey is underwritten by Stillwater Insurance Group . Renters Insurance is a very valuable and inexpensive option to cover the tenant fromthe results of a Negligent Act ; this would be covered by the Personal Liability section of the policy , this part is also not subject to the deductible on the policy . In addition to the Personal Liability section , thepolicy will offer protection for Personal Contents against a number of perils including Fire , Theft , Water Damage and a number of additional perils listed on the specific policy . Coverage forms vary from State to State . There is an online method to obtain a quote and purchase renters insurance online directly in multiple States ; the following linkwill be very helpful : WEBSITELINK It is our recommendation to select the highest available Liability Limit , the sufficient amount of Personal Property and a high deductible ; these selections will produce ample coverage with a low premium rate . For additional questions and/or assistance not available on the automated process , we recommend contacting a licensed professional for guidance .
Medicare is operated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- , which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services in cooperation with the Social Security Administration , it does not have a central claim-paying office for incoming claims . Rather , large insurance companies , chosen within each state , actually administer the claim payment process . So , from state to state , claim submissions are submitted to different entities . For example , claimants living in New Jersey submit claims to the New Jersey Medicare Claim Office .
I can sell policies in New Jersey and in New York . There are many companies that offer this coverage . Some plans may be different than others however they do serve their purpose . I work with all major carriers which is best to give you the best coverages at the best rates . It is best to speak with a licensed agent to obtain a specific coverage option . I am licensed and I have many plans from the top carrier for this coverage .
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
The states that offer Short Term Disability benefits are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . California offers Short Term Disability that can last up to one year . New York requires most employers to offer Short Term Disability coverage . New Jersey , Rhode Island and Hawaii offer Temporary Disability -LRB- TD -RRB- benefits .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
Oxford Health , which is now owned by UnitedHealthcare , offers individual insurance coverage in the states of New York and New Jersey . You can apply for coverage by contacting Oxford directly , or be contacting an independent agent that represents the company . I always suggest working with an independent agent , as they have your best interests at hurt , not that of some insurance company that may be their employer .
The states of California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island require disability insurance to be provided to state residents for income provision due to non-work related disabilities . Puerto Rico also has a disability insurance requirement .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
At What Age Do I Apply For Medicare ?
If you are someone who has paid into Medicare for at least 10 years , or were a stay at home spouse whose husband or wife is eligible for Medicare , you apply at age 65 . If you are already receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you will be automatically enrolled in Medicare at age 65 .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
In order for someone to receive Medicare you need to be disable orage 65 . You will need to be disable for 2 years to receive Medicare . At age 65 you willbe eligible to apply forMedicare 3 months before you turn age 65 the month of your birthday and 3 monthsafter your birthday . Once you apply for Medicare you will need to apply for additional health 20 % that Original Medicare does not coverage . Original Medicare only coverage 's 80 % of you Medicare bills . You will have the options to apply for a Part C plan Medicare Advantage , Part D planmany plansor a Medicare Supplement plan . For more information contact Agent Ms. Best at 1866-491-1491 .
Medicare Part D , where do I apply ? What is the doughnut hole and how does it work ? How much does Medicare Part D cost ? Can I sign up for Part D at any time ? Which plan is the best one for me ? All good questions . The answer to where do you apply is this . You can apply through Medicare.gov You can sign up direct through a carrier Or you can find a good local insurance agent that specializes in Medicare plans
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test If you 're an older individuals -LRB- e.g. age 55 -RRB- , some carriers may also ask for an EKG to be completed with the other exam requirements . If you 're a senior -LRB- e.g. age 70 -RRB- , some carriers may ask you to complete a mature assessment -LRB- congnitive and physical movement testing - e.g. memory tests , walk a distance , etc. -RRB- . Exams typically take no more than a half hour or so and can be completed in the privacy of your own home -LRB- some people prefer their work place which is also acceptable -RRB- . You do n't have to go to a doctor 's office or a clinic to have the exams done . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . Please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
People who participate in high risk activities or have impaired health conditions often are charged much higher premiums for life insurance , whether they are applying for term or permanent coverage . The price that you pay is determined by your age , the requested amount of coverage , and risk classification . If the carrier offers a substandard/table-rating for the coverage , the premiums will usually be based off of the standard risk class with an extra 25 % increase for each extra letter assigned -LRB- the 25 % figure can vary by carrier - e.g. some may use 17 % , etc. -RRB- . For example , a Table B rating would cost the standard rate plus 50 % -LRB- B = 2 tables -RRB- , a Table D rating would cost double the standard rate -LRB- D = 4 tables -RRB- , etc. . Insurance companies may also look at assigning a flat extra rating with a specified cost per thousand dollars of insurance -LRB- such as $ 5.00 per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . Flat extras may be applied for only a few years , or for the life of the policy and are more commonly assigned for high-risk activities . Table-ratings are more commonly given for high-risk health conditions . I often also see many people just apply for a bunch of companies at the same time because they 're a high-risk individual . DO NOT do this ! . Applying for coverage with more than one company at the same time could hurt your chances of securing a policy . It is in your best interest to find out before applying what the most likely offer will be from 10-15 different companies so that you know what to expect and know that you are getting the best possible offer . I highly recommend working with an independent agent who can look at multiple companies for you - trying to get that information can be very difficult to do on your own . This is the exact field my group specializes in and would be happy to be of assistance with your program .
The maximum age for applying varies by carrier . The lowest maximum age that I know of is 65 with Lincoln National 's single premium MoneyGuard Reserve . But , any of the carriers can change their maximum issue age any time they want -LRB- with notice -RRB- and they do . The oldest qualifying age that I 'm aware of is 80 , but typically health issues at that age seriously limit the chance of successful underwriting . And , the costs at that age are so high as to make stand-alone long-term care insurance virtually unaffordable to any but the most wealthy.Contracts that have a linked long-term care benefit rider may accept an application equal to the maximum date of applying for the contract without the rider . For example , some carriers have limited the age of adding an LTC rider to a life insurance policy . Some of the carriers that provide a `` living benefit '' for paying for long-term care costs by accelerating the death benefit of a life insurance policy are John Hancock , Nationwide Life , and AXA Financial . Other carriers may have a similar rider that adds `` must be a permanent or chronic condition '' to the criteria to qualify for the living benefit.Annuities with favored withdrawal privileges for covering LTC costs may be the only option for the very elderly . Some annuity companies issue single-premium immediate annuities at virtually any age -LRB- usually the maximum is age 90 -RRB- . However , payments from that type of annuity may not be fully income-tax free.Because of the increasing concern over financial abuse of the elderly , it is important that a qualified tax advisor be consulted before moving any money into a financial instrument that does not require medical underwriting and locks money up for a specified period of time or which allows very limited access to it without stiff back-end -LRB- surrender -RRB- charges .
`` Excess Charges '' only occur with Part B coverage . Whether or not a Medicare Beneficiary may be subjected to Part B Excess Charges by a provider depends entirely on how the provider is contracted with Medicare . When the provider choose their method of contracting with Medicare they must choose whether they will be `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' . This terminology may be confusing but it really is not . `` Participating '' simply means the provider will accept the Medicare assignment of the Medicare approved amount as payment as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered . `` Non-Participating '' means the provider has chosen to not necessarily accept the Medicare approved amount as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered and may choose to charge the beneficiary up to 15 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- in addition to the beneficiary 's cost sharing amount -RRB- . The provider may choose on a case-by-case basis whether to seek excess charges from the beneficiary . This rule applies ONLY to physician fee schedules thus applies only to Medicare Part B charges . So it depends entirely upon whether the provider has chosen to contract as a `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' provider with Medicare . If you are in doubt it may be beneficial to contact the office manager at your provider 's office and ask whether the provider is `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' as it applies to Medicare approved payments . All the best . Mark
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Financial ratings really do n't matter when it comes to Medicare supplement insurance . All Medicare supplement plans are identical , and all pay claims on a timely basis . There are considerable consumer protections included in Medicare supplement plans . If your Medicare supplement carrier gets in financial trouble or decides to exit the market you have a `` free pass '' to apply for any plan with any other carrier , regardless of your health . The best Medicare supplemental insurance plan in your state is one that matches your needs and budget . Medigap insurance rates vary considerably by zip code , age , tobacco use and plan . The older you are the higher your Medicare supplement rate will be . The exception is for those who are under age 65 and on disability and Medicare . In most states rates for under age 65 are astronomical . Many carriers offer competitive rates from age 65 to 74 . Above age 74 some plans -LRB- surprisingly -RRB- become more competitive while others less so . Tobacco use often adds 20 % to the rate but can be more , depending on the carrier . Plan F is the most expensive -LRB- and most popular -RRB- followed by D or G -LRB- depending on your state -RRB- , N then Hi F which is the least expensive . You can generally find a site that offers `` instant Medigap quotes '' but keep in mind the most competitive rates are usually not illustrated online . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You do not need to apply for Medicare Part A . It will be given to you at no cost when you turn age 65 if you have paid social security taxes for 10-years or more or qualify from your working spouse . Part B will come automatically if you are collecting social security when you turn age 65 . You can opt out of Part B if you do n't need it yet and have other coverage . If you want Part C you will have to apply for it . Part D you need to apply for .
Most nonmed , final expense policies have a cutoff age of 80-85 for policy eligibility . Therefore , 88 year old 's must apply for medically underwritten Life Insurance to get coverage . This has several implications : 1 -RRB- The minimum face amount is generally higher than what you can get in a nonmed final expense policy . At that age , the minimum is usually $ 50,000 + . This makes for a higher premium . 2 -RRB- The applicant must qualify medically , which can be much more stringent than applying for a no exam policy . There are no guaranteed issue policies available at age 88 . 3 -RRB- That being said , it is possible to get life insurance at age 88 if the applicant is in fairly good health and can afford the premiums . The maximum cutoff for medically underwritten policies that I have seen is age 90 .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
A life insurance policy could be denied for any of the following reasons : 1 -RRB- The applicant 's health was not controlled . This can be anything from someone with diabetes having an A1C over 10 , to someone with cancer having only months to live . 2 -RRB- The applicant 's health has not been stable for a certain length of time . This can range from someone who had very high blood pressure and only been on medication for one month , to someone with MS who has had a recent major exacerbation . 3 -RRB- The applicant is planning to have major medical testing or procedure done in the near future . In other words , if your doctor has scheduled a test to see if you have Parkinson 's , you will need to wait until after the test to apply . If you have gastric bypass surgery scheduled in two months , the insurance company will ask that you wait until after your surgery to apply . 4 -RRB- The applicant has had a recent bankruptcy that has not been discharged , has undergone recent drug or alcohol treatment , has had numerous traffic violations in the past year , or other non-health related risk factors . The above mostly relate to medically underwritten policies . There are simplified issue policies -LRB- that do not require an exam -RRB- and guaranteed issued policies -LRB- that do not have any requirements -RRB- that can be obtained when a medically underwritten policy will not work . Simplified and guaranteed issue policies do have restrictions on face amounts , you must be in a certain age range to get them , and they are not available in every state . Thus , some people do apply for simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies and get declined simply because they do not fit the age , or it is not offered in their state . This is most common for persons applying by mail or online . If you enlist the help of a good agent , you can avoid many declines by having proper guidance in the first place .
Who is the average person and how much of their compensation does average person want to protect ? Long term disability insurance is paycheck insurance . First determine if your tax bracket warrants deducting the disability insurance premium as a legitimate business . If the answer is yes , apply for 80 % of your compensation . Keep in mind that the benefits will be taxable as ordinary income . If the answer is no , apply for 60 % of your compensation , your benefits will be tax free . Whats the cost ? Whats your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition ? Whats the amount you want to cover ? How long do you want coverage to last ? What elimination period do you require based on your current cash reserves ? It is possible that you may pay between 3-5 % of the compensation youre attempting to indemnify .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are many reasons that people can be denied life insurance , but unfortunately , people sometimes get denied for reasons that could have been avoided . Avoidable declines are often due to agents who do not do a thorough job in asking questions of their clients before applying . But denials can also be a result of clients who lie or hide information , hoping to pay a better price . Most often , clients simply do not think that something matters -LRB- e.g. bankruptcy -RRB- , or are not aware of what is in their medical records -LRB- e.g. CHF instead of high blood pressure -RRB- . Ironically , one would think that the simplified issue policies that you apply for by mail would be the simplest to get , because they have the least questions and no exam to trip you up . But I find that these are a source of many declines , due to their ambiguous wording , or people not taking the time to read the instructions well . I have been writing mostly impaired risk life insurance online for over 10 years , so have written thousands of policies for people with health conditions . But just when I get to feeling good about so many cases getting approved as I quoted , I will get hit with a decline out of left field that I did not see coming . Sometimes , it just seems impossible to avoid them . But a good agent should not have a lot of them , or they are not probably doing their job as they should .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Can I Do If My Car Was Hit In A Hit And Run And The Owner Of The Other Vehicle Denies Responsibility ?
Repair of your car is normally covered by the collision coverage contained in your auto policy . If your car does not have collision coverage you may have exhausted your insurance options . You can litigate directly against the other vehicle owner . An attorney can advise you on the possibility of prevailing in a lawsuit .
Arizona does not . No-fault auto insurance has the insurance company pay for your damages no matter who 's at fault . In Arizona , we have uninsured and underinsured -LRB- UM/UIM -RRB- insurance for damages other people cause to you if they do n't have insurance or have enough . With state law , you have to sign whether or not you want UM/UIM coverage . Things UM/UIM may cover : A driver hitting you who does n't have insurance A driver hitting you who has insufficient coverage for your hospital bills A hit and run driver A driver who hits you while you 're walking or cycling Your medical bills when you 're a passenger in someone else 's vehicle and they have an accident -LRB- when the other driver 's insurance or theirs is insufficient -RRB- . UM/UIM is an excellent option for people looking for no-fault insurance . In fact , at our agency , we recommend UM/UIM to every one of our policyholders . If you have any questions , do n't hesitate to reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
generally speaking the answer is no . Insurers use credit information in-bedded in insurance scores . But it does not flow backwards as your question asks , There are two types of scores in most transactions involving credit . There are instances where the requester has to advise you that you are , are for example seeking a loan or credit card . Those are considered `` hard '' hits to your credit . By seeking that type of loan you are in fact telegraphing to others I need the money . Insurance scores typically are `` soft '' hits , that is to say they look at information but do not impact the result . i have run a couple insurers and worked for several others and I have never seen an issue with this being a hard hit
The average cost in the US has been around $ 850 for the past several year . My data could be a bit off and old , but in the last several years competition for auto business has kept pricing static . Here is the basic issue question : I do n't know who you are in a demographic sense , but also in the sense of needing coverage to protect yourself . . Auto Insurance is regulated by the various 50 states and can a bit different in what coverages are required to be offered.But here is what typically comprises and auto policy : Bodily Injury Liability -LRB- protection for the people you kill or injure -RRB- Property Damage -LRB- for the car you hit or the 18 wheeler you force off the road unintentionally -RRB- Medical Payments for the little issue that happens in your car that you do n't want to have to file suit against some one to be indemnified -LRB- i.e. your passenger catching their finger in the closing of a door -RRB- Collision for damage to your own car in a wreck or hitting a curb or a pot hole etc. . ComprehensiveCoverage : for theft , flood , hail , falling trees , broken windshields etc And last , but probably the most important coverage on your policy , Uninsured and Under-insured Motorist Coverage So , despite all the ads to the contrary you ought to take more than 15 minutes to figure , with the help of an agent , what exposures you have . The worst scenarios have nothing to do with fixing your cars , it is about fixing peoples lives and keeping you assets . So to answer your question I would need to know what do you have to lose , if you cause injury to someone else , because what you do not pay for in insurance you will pay for on your own including future garnishment of your income . A fairly decent rule of thumb to consider things by would be to look at your lifestyle . If you already own your own home -LRB- including with a mortgage -RRB- you need a minimum of 100/300/100 spit limits of Bodily Injury Coverage -LRB- that protects the people you hit -RRB- and you should carry the same to protect yourself , your family and passengers in your car with the same limit of 100/300/100 for Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage . If you do not understand how all of these pieces of the coverage fit together then you should really seek out an Independent agent who sells for multiple companies and can tailor the policy to your needs If you live in AZ , CA , TX , GA , or MO I would be glad to assist you -LRB- call 1-866-933-4372 -RRB- -LRB- open 8 AM to 8 PM Est Monday through Friday -RRB- . If you live elsewhere seek out an Independent Agent in your area Good luck to you and I hope this answer helps some Jack Heller , CPCU
OK , this will be a quick run down of coverages most commonly needed but the answer may vary some form state to state : The first coverage you need is Bodily Injury Liability . This is the amount of coverage you need to protect yourself from the claims and law suits of people you injure . The second but related coverage is the Property damage coverage for property you destroy . So it is common in the US to sell them in groups such as 100/300/100 . Now what does that mean : The first number is critical . This is the per person limit of bodily injury liability . Insurers are not stupid . They know that in 75 % of all accidents , there will be one person in each vehicle -LRB- it is just the way Americans drive -RRB- So , there is a lot less likelihood of hitting that 300,000 but it would take injury to more than one person to do it . So the odds are with your insurer . Another way to buy insurance -LRB- usually about 10 % more in cost -RRB- is through Combined Single Limits coverage , CSL gives you one bulk sum to pay the claim more as the accident happened rather than based on the sub limits of your policy . So split limits are the norm , but for a little more you might want combined single limit coverage . The next coverage is usually PIP or Medical Payments . Both of these sort of compensate for usually minor events for which the party is injured and you want to take care of the injury regardless of fault . For example you give a ride to a friend who slams the door on his finger . Yes it was his fault , but it was your car and you do n't want suing you over this . Your policy responds with either medical payment or Personal Injury . PIP is usually broader and often includes wages loss which Med Pay does not . The next group of coverages are usually the most important on your policy . These are your uninsured or under-insured motorist coverage . In about 14 % of accidents the at fault party will have no insurance . And in the next grouping of the accidents you will see coverage of the at fault party at state minimums or not much more . . Now you need the protection of UM coverage . A good rule of thumb is never buy less UM than you have for Bodily Injury Liability . This is now you protecting yourself , your family and passengers in your car . It is perhaps the most little understood coverage and most important part of your policy.Lastly as respects UM/UIM you need Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Property Damage at a level commensurate with the ACV of you car . Next come the coverages on the physical damage to your car . The coverages are Comprehensive or also called OTC or Other than Collision . which covers many perils such as theft , fire , flood , trees falling on the vehicle etc. . Collision occurs when you hit something such as a tree , a road curb , a pothole , another vehicle etc. . This is where the value of your car is a consideration . You should also select a deductible that is right for you and your household budget From here we go to many ancillary coverages including Rental Reimbursement which is usually stated as a dollar limit for thirty days -LRB- enough time usually to get your car repaired -RRB- > The coverage is triggered by another cause of loss such as collision . The next and perhaps last coverage to consider for the general public is towing or as some companies offer road side assistance . Towing is just that towing . Whereas roadside service is usually sign and drive towing , run out of gas , lock out of car etc. . Now if you have a new car you might want replacement coverage or if leased gap coverage for loan or lease . If you do n't understand any of this gives us a call , We believe an educated consumer is better for every one .
Collision is coverage for the insureds auto regardless of fault . If you have purchased collision coverage and your vehicle is involved in a collision this coverage will repair the damage up to the value of the vehicle minus the collision deductible . A collision is when you hit an object whether moving or stationaryor an object hits you . An object hitting you would be moving but this would exclude an animal which would fall under comprehensive coverage . If you are at fault naturally you would pay your deductible for the repairs of your vehicle . If the other party is at fault you have the option of using your own insurance and paying your deductible or going through the other carrier should the other carrier admit liability . If the other carrier steps up quickly then you would not have to pay your deductible . It 's nice when the other party admits fault but is some cases this is not the case and you would have to pay your deductible and let you insurance company then subrogate to get your deductible back at a later date .
Comprehensive coverage is anoptional coverage available on your car insurance . Also know as Other-Than-Collision on some policies , comprehensive coverage covers things like hitting a deer , hitting a bird , falling objects , and damage to your windshield from rocks and other objects . This is an optional coverage , and you can elect not to have it , but then you will be responsible for paying for any repairs to your vehicle as a result from damage from anything other than a collision .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
If you hit a car and you are uninsured many states will hit you with a very large fine and possibly take your license away for up to a year . This is on top of what you will have to pay out of pocket for damages you caused . On the other hand if the car you hit is uninsured your insurance would pay for the repairs for damages you caused and the other guy gets his or her license taken away .
Your auto insurance company can deny your claim , although most claims tend to be approved . For example , if you fraudulently filed a claim , or attempted to recover damages on a vehicle that you did not drive or own , surely , the claim would be denied . If you pet was attempting to drive your vehicle and hit a stop sign , then do n't expect a check from your insurer . When in doubt , an experienced broker can explain the entire claims process , how long it takes and what the likely outcome is going to be .
If you have Collision coverage on your auto policy , then you have coverage for damage to your car as a result of hitting a stationary object . A curb would certainly qualify as a stationary object . Collision coverage provides benefits if you hit another motor vehicle , a stationary object or a human being . Comprehensive coverage takes care of other physiecal damage or loss such as flooding , beiiung hit by a falling or flying object , fire , theft , vandalism , etc. . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specifics of your policy to gain a broader understanding of the benefits that it provides and any limitations or exclusions it may contain .
That is a great question ! The answer will depend upon your company , and the policy restrictions . It may cover for a specified number of days , it may cover until the repairs to your vehicle are completed . A couple of years ago my car was hit , and the driver at faults insurance covered my rental car . After a week , they notified me that they were no longer going to cover the rental car , and it would be my expense . My car was n't finished , and the insurance company had not been in a hurry to see it get finished . After discussing the situation with them , they agreed to pay until my car was completed . They were n't happy , but were liable . If you would like some details on that discussion , contact me , and I 'll share them with you . Thanks for asking !
In order to operate a car in most states you must meet minimum financial responsibility limits . These are normally represented by insurance with specific bodily injury and property damage liability coverage . While this satisfies the state requirement it is not sufficient in many accidents . The company is only responsible to meet the amount of coverage provided . If your limit was $ 30,000 of liability coverage and you hit a van carrying two children and both of them required ambulance service to emergency and were seriously injured , your limits would be exhausted in the first few days . The remaining expenses will probably appear as a law suit against you and any assets that you might have . Your lender will require that you maintain physical damage insurance on your car . In fact , they retain the right to purchase a collateral protection certificate which is something like insurance and pass that cost directly to you if you fail to maintain coverage . The lending company will give you latitude as to how much deductible you can select but they want to make sure that their interests are protected . The most important thing to understand is that the cost of an insurance policy is best determined when you have a claim . If the policy doesnt cover the damages , it was too expensive . Select well because it can make a substantial difference when you experience a claim . When you meet with an insurance agent to select coverages it is best to choose an agent who will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . Setting limits is a critical issue . The agent should tell you the maximum amount of liability insurance that he can provide in your situation . You should start with this maximum number because a lawsuit can cause serious damage to you financially . If you can afford the additional premium you could even consider an umbrella policy to extend further the liability limits . Often property damage liability limits are separate . Many cars cost in excess of $ 50,000 and in the event of a multiple car accident exceeding $ 50,000 is possible . Take as much coverage as is offered . The agent will then offer you medical payments coverage . Select the highest available limit unless you are confident that you will not have an occupant in your car who is not fully insured for medical care . This coverage will allow you to call for an ambulance and make sure proper medical care is extended to those in your vehicle . Your company will offer uninsured and underinsured coverage . This protects you should you be hit by someone without insurance or someone with inadequate insurance . This situation comes up frequently and this coverage should not be overlooked . Consider a high limit . The company will probably offer an accidental death and dismemberment benefit . That benefit is a form of life insurance when death or dismemberment is the result of an auto accident . It is highly restricted but it is also very inexpensive . Other benefits such as stowing and roadside service provide you with a single point of contact should you have mechanical problems or a collision . Generally these are a good value .
If we were to average the insurance cost on one new car of every make and model , and do the same for every truck and SUV , the difference in cost between the rate will largely be the difference between the group of cars with a higher average value . Recent research has shown trucks to be slightly less expensive for occupants because they weather an accident better in a vehicle with greater mass -LRB- weight -RRB- . On the other hand , trucks are causing slightly greater injuries to those hit by trucks and inside the cars they hit . Dollar for dollar I 'd give a very slight edge to trucks as cheaper to insure .
There are many reasons that people can be denied life insurance , but unfortunately , people sometimes get denied for reasons that could have been avoided . Avoidable declines are often due to agents who do not do a thorough job in asking questions of their clients before applying . But denials can also be a result of clients who lie or hide information , hoping to pay a better price . Most often , clients simply do not think that something matters -LRB- e.g. bankruptcy -RRB- , or are not aware of what is in their medical records -LRB- e.g. CHF instead of high blood pressure -RRB- . Ironically , one would think that the simplified issue policies that you apply for by mail would be the simplest to get , because they have the least questions and no exam to trip you up . But I find that these are a source of many declines , due to their ambiguous wording , or people not taking the time to read the instructions well . I have been writing mostly impaired risk life insurance online for over 10 years , so have written thousands of policies for people with health conditions . But just when I get to feeling good about so many cases getting approved as I quoted , I will get hit with a decline out of left field that I did not see coming . Sometimes , it just seems impossible to avoid them . But a good agent should not have a lot of them , or they are not probably doing their job as they should .
Collision coverage is for the physical damage to your automobile that comes about when you hit or are hit by another automobile , or object . This includes upset . The coverage pays for repairs to your vehicle for the amount of loss that exceeds your deductible . Comprehensive coverage pays for loss caused by anything other than collision . This coverage also includes damage caused by hitting a bird or animal .
That depends on the terms and conditions of your auto policy . Some companies include an accident foregiveness provision automatically for long term policy holders who have been otherwise claims free . Other companies offer similar foregiveness provisions as amendments that you can purchase . Your insurance will also generally not go up if you are the victim of someone else 's negligence - a hit and run for example . Finally , if you hit a deer or some other animal and file a claim , generally your insurance company is not going to increase your premium as a result .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
Is It Worth Buying Critical Illness Insurance ?
The key to a critical illness plan is to get a good one . Sadly , most agents and even fewer consumers know the difference in a good critical illness policy and a poor one . Never buy on price alone , and shop around . This is one area where paying a little more is worth it . Make sure the policy is health insurance , not life insurance with a rider .
If you have a critical illness in your future , and will have received a lump sum of money to get you through that process of treatment and -LRB- hopefully -RRB- recovery , you will have thought it is worth it . No one knows the future . To some , having the knowledge that such a benefit would be provided if they are diagnosed with a life threatening illness , is worth it . To others , that is not such a big deal . Whether it is worth getting critical illness insurance or not is really a person decision . That being said , there are many more survivors of critical illnesses now than in the past . So it is a risk worth considering .
Right Peggy !! The `` death benefit '' inside a disability policy is usually limited to a few months worth of the `` Monthly Benefit '' . So if your benefit is $ 3,000 a month , then you might get 3 , 6 , maybe 9 thousand in a death benefit . LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE . Does it pay ONLY AFTER you have met an elimination period or is it an immediate benefit ? Disability is a very important plan to own . Yet , I know that buying life insurance , buying disability , buying long term care , buying critical illness , & then buying home , auto , umbrella , & more can be very overwhelming ... . You might consider buying a Living benefits & / or Hybrid Life insurance plan ... These are life insurance plans that you can use BEFORE you die . I have a massage therapist that owns a plan with a death benefit , a $ 30,000 critical illness benefit , and has a $ 1000 a month disability benefit . She pays about $ 43 month for all of this . PERFECT for single mom with a modest income . YES ... standalone Disability has more features and better terms ... yet the all in one plan allows her to cover a critical illness , a disability , & early death . Reach out with questions :--RRB- - gravy
I have friends who have collected on critical illness insurance policies , and it definitely was worth it , to them . Insurance is protection against the unknown , so one never knows whether it will be worth it for you or not . If there are illnesses covered by critical illness policies that run in your family , the policy would most likely have more value to you than to a family that does not appear to carry risk for cancer , stroke , etc. .
Critical illness insurance can be a supplemental insurance to cover high medical insurance deductibles . But critical illness is worth looking into if your family has a history of hospitalization or a predisposition to disease or sickness . Many working seniors purchase critical illness as a defensive measure against unexpected medical bills that may not be covered under Medicare or their Medicare Supplement policies .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
The key to a critical illness plan is to get a good one . Sadly , most agents and even fewer consumers know the difference in a good critical illness policy and a poor one . Never buy on price alone , and shop around . This is one area where paying a little more is worth it . Make sure the policy is health insurance , not life insurance with a rider .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
People who buy critical illness insurance are those who have a genetic predisposition to certain illnesses based on family history , smokers -LRB- who have increased risk for getting some diseases -RRB- , those who have had loved ones with critical illnesses and have seen the impact firsthand , and those who do not have savings on hand to pay for the costs that come with this type of diagnosis -LRB- loss of work , travel , child care , bills -RRB- . All type of people buy critical illness insurance .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
Critical illness is not an investment , but insurance , a part of defensive financial planning . Is it worth the premiums to supplement your medical insurance plan ? It depends . Critical illness insurance should be a consideration if your family has genetic predisposition to disease , chronic conditions and/or a history of hospitalization .
Critical illness policies cover as many as 15 or so different kinds of illness . Most critical illness plans pay a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis provided you meet the terms of the policy . In evaluating critical illness plans read and understand the definitions and make sure you buy a health based plan .
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How To Change Home Insurance ?
To change your coverages for your homeowners insurance contact your local agent or your insurance carrier to discuss your coverage concerns . If you are looking to change carriers , contact local agents in your area to find out about coverage availability and pricing within your geographic location this service is provide at no cost typically .
Ideally changing your homeowners insurance from one carrier to another would be best on the anniversary date of the renewal of the policy . In other words , if the policy runs from 7/5/2014 - 7/5/2015 , ideally changing your policy on 7/5/2015 would be best . However , there a number of factors involved . As a licensed independent agent , I recommend reviewing your current coverage once a year with your agent to be sure you have the proper coverage . At times , carriers go through rate changes and it may be favorable to change to another carrier . Understand however , that when you change your home insurance , you should strongly consider changing you auto along with it to the same company . Most carriers offer substantial discounts for the multipolicy discount of having both home and auto coverage with the same carrier . The second reason it is best to change on your anniversary is most times your home insurance is rolled into your monthly mortgage amount through an escrow account . Whenever you do change carriers , the new carrier will have to be billed , the old carrier has to refund the escrow amount , and the new check forwarded to the new carrier . It is easiest and least confusion , if that is done at the annual period . With all that being said , if during the middle of the year you find it prudent to change your homeowner coverage to another carrier , it can be done , you just need to be aware and work with a knowledgeable agent to be sure the transition runs smoothly .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
You bet . Home insurance is n't a two-way street . There are certain things an insurance company is unable to do , such as cancel your policy if you are paying your premiums . On the other hand , as the policy holder , you have the right to cancel your policy at any time . Their are a couple key items to consider before making a change . 1 . What coverage changes exist from my current company to the new company ? Is my coverage improving ? 2 . What discounts will fall off by making this change ? 3 . How is the billing handled ? There are a couple more steps to take if your insurance if paid by your mortgage company . The bottom-line answer is yes . Work with an experience professional to help get the change done properly . It happens every day !
Only the policyowner can change the beneficiary on a life insurance policy . You can call your policy 's agent or the carrier directly to find out the current beneficiary structure on the policy . If the policyowner wants to change the beneficiary , they only need to fill out a simple change of beneficiary form and submit it to the carrier - this can only be done while the insured is living , once they have passed away , no changes are allowed and the proceeds will be paid out as cited in the policy . You want to make sure you do n't create any tax implications to the proceeds when you make those changes -LRB- e.g. violating the `` goodman triangle '' -RRB- - you should discuss changes with your policy 's agent before making any changes to ensure everything is in good order .
In most cases there are two times when you can cancel your employer health insurance : during your employer 's open enrollment , and in the event of a qualifying life event . Your employer has an open enrollment once per plan year . You can make changes to your elections during this time . Changes become effective in the new plan year . You can make changes outside the open enrollment if you have a qualifying life event . The changes must be consistent with the life event . Life events that may allow you to cancel coverage are a change in residence , change in martial status -LRB- divorce -RRB- , death of spouse or child , a change employment for a dependent that gains coverage .
You can call your policy 's agent or the carrier directly to find out the current beneficiary structure on the policy . This information can only be released to the policyowner and only the policyowner can make changes to the beneficiary structure , if desired . If the policyowner wants to change the beneficiary , they only need to fill out a simple change of beneficiary form and submit it to the carrier - this can only be done while the insured is living , once they have passed away , no changes are allowed and the proceeds will be paid out as cited in the policy . You want to make sure you do n't create any tax implications to the proceeds when you make those changes -LRB- e.g. violating the `` goodman triangle '' -RRB- - you should discuss changes with your policy 's agent before making any changes to ensure everything is in good order .
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , the answer is no , you really ca n't . There are specific times set for the enrollment and changing of plans , so that the insurance companies can accurately assess the costs and risks involved in providing that insurance . If people changed plans constantly , those costs and risk factors would be very difficult to get a grip on . While the annual enrollment period begins in the fall , there are reasons where you can change or add coverage other than at that time . Certain life changing events such as having or adopting a child , losing or changing jobs , or getting married or divorced allow you to change or add coverage . If you go to the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- website , www.healthcare.org you can enter your information and see if you qualify to add or change coverage . I hope that helps , good luck , and thanks for asking !
Homeowners Insurance premium is not Negotiable!Insurance companies hire the services of actuarial firms to calculate the premium necessary for each type of risk ; the very skilled services of actuaries are crucial to the liquidity of an insurance company . Some States require that the premium and underwriting structure be submitted to the Department of Insurance for approval prior to release to the public ; other States simply require that the premium and underwriting rules are set in writing before release . The only way to change the premium of a policy is to either qualify for a discount , change the deductible or change the limits of coverage . It is a good idea to obtain your quote online in advance and with today 's technology , you 'd be able to change options and simply see the premium change as you change your desired options . There is alink providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
There is n't a correct answer to this question , only the answer each individual comes to in regard to their wants and needs . The catch to the decision of when or how much to buy is the longer you wait the more expensive it becomes to purchase . Something to consider that rarely is considered is the purchase of Whole Life insurance is control . A whole life is the one policy where the price is set at the begining and stays that way through the life of the policy . With term the insured does not really control cost the insurance carrier does through the life of the policy . An insurance company can not change or alter a whole life policy without your permission . Since you can combine policies and types of coverage -LRB- it is never all or nothing -RRB- how much whole life is entirely up to you . The split is up to the individual . Some people carry combinations of policies with the idea that they will shed the term as time goes by , ending up with the whole life at the end of a long happy life . Last thought on this subject . An insurance company has less power over the insured with whole life . They have to `` ask '' you and you have to agree to any changes . Where this can be reassuring is if your health changes down the road . I have several serious health conditions and it is good to know my life insurance company can not raise my price or change anything without my say so .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
There are several factors that can increase premium in a homeowners insurance policy . One could be the cost of construction . Since the home must be insured with enough dwelling coverage to cover the home in a total loss you my see an increase in dwelling coverage thereby an increase in premium . Also age of the home can be a factor . In brand new homes most insurance carriers give big discounts for up to 10 years . As the home ages the discount diminishes until gone . Generally all other factors aside the home can remain in a stable position until the home becomes around 30 yrs old which can at that time start increasing premium do to the risk increasing . Another factor is just a rate change by the carrier mostly due to high losses in any given area . And of course your claims history is a factor .
If you have term life insurance it has no cash value . That would make the answer very simple . No one can take that from you . So your life insurance would remain secure while in a nursing home , if it is term insurance , so long as you can find a way to continue to pay the premiums . The more interesting question is what if you have permanent or cash value life insurance ? These policies build up value , and can actually be sold , or surrendered for cash . A nursing home might want that money . Depending on the nursing home and their contract with you , they might require you to pay them from such proceeds , but there is no legal requirement that you do so for them , and you can , of course , go to a different nursing home . The harder question is what if you have no or little other assets , and are planning to enter a government assisted facility ? Medicare will NOT pay for long term care , but MediCal will , but you will need to spend down your assets . So the question arises , if you are required to spend down your assets , will you have to sell the life insurance policy -LRB- meaning surrender its cash value -RRB- in order to stay in a MediCal nursing home . The answer to that very narrow specific question can change from time to time , as the MediCal rules change . But know that if you wish to claim impoverishment , and you retain ownership of a substantial cash value asset , you should expect the government to demand that you sell it and use the proceeds to pay for your care . Tread carefully . Thank you . GARY LANE .
The damages caused by a change in electrical current that is supplied from outside is specifically excluded from most renters policies . If the change in voltage is caused by a covered peril , like fire in the rental unit then coverage might be available . The key is what causes the power change and is the cause inside or outside the home and whether the cause of the change is a covered peril .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is A Deductible On Health Insurance ?
A health insurance deductible is the amount you must pay before your benefits `` kick in '' and begin paying -LRB- for most services - some benefits , such as preventive care , provide coverageimmediately -RRB- . The deductible amount varies by plan . For example , under the new Affordable CareAct , a catastrophic plan may feature a $ 6,350 deductible , a bronze plan may feature a $ 5,000 deductible , a silver plan may feature a $ 3,000 deductible , a gold plan may feature a $ 2,000 deductible , and a platinum plan may feature a $ 0 deductible . These figures are not the same for all plans on each metal level .
In general , any deductible in an insurance policy represents the amount that you are responsible for paying for a covered loss . In a health insurance policy , this is an up front amount that needs to be met before your coverage will begin paying according to the terms and conditions of your policy . Some health insurance policies also include a `` co-pay '' amount which is also an amount for which you are responsible once coverage begins . Ths amount is in addition to the deductible which you would have already met and is usually capped at a certain amount to limit your out of pocket expenses .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
HDHP stands for High Deductible Health Plan . Generally , this term has been used in association with a type of health insurance policy purchased that was specifically designed to be used with a Health Savings Account -LRB- H.S.A -RRB- . In this context the health insurance plan design has an upfront deductible that must be paid by the policyholder before any co-insurance cost sharing and/or copayments can be applied to the policy 's coverage . The IRS determines the minimum deductible and out-of-pocket maximums for H.S.A eligible high deductible health plans each year . For this reason the deductible associated with HDHPs changes over time . In 2014 the minimum individual deductible for a HDHP is $ 1250 , in 2015 it will increase to $ 1300 . Re-designs of health insurance plan benefits prompted by the Affordable Care Act have introduced new health insurance plans that have substantially higher deductibles that previously were most often associated with an H.S.A based plans . As such , the consumer must closely examine the detailed benefits summary of the health insurance plans they are considering . This is because there are plan designs now that certainly have a high deductible but they also have other benefit features like office visit or prescription copayments that disqualify them from being used with an H.S.A. . In short , you will be best served to seek out the services of a health insurance broker who is knowledgeable in these matters .
A tough question to answer because it is so subjective , what 's high to one person may quite acceptable to another . As 30 year insurance industry professional I would say that by the standards of 2014 , you are entering `` high deductible '' territory when your plan 's annual deductible exceeds $ 2000 for an individual . When many consumers hear the term high deductible it is often being used as another way of saying this is a health insurance plan designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . The model for this product being that the lower premiums for a high deductible health insurance plan with no copayment features will free up money to fund an HSA and hopefullyaccumulate a health care nest egg for a person 's retirement years . In 2014 the minimum deductible for an HSA based plan is $ 1250 and the maximum deductible is $ 6350 . With the advent of the Affordable Care Act 's -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- health insurance marketplaces in 2014 the consumer is now presented with a whole new array of health insurance plan designs that will certainly meet anyone 's definition of a high deductible plan but that may not be designed to be compatible with an HSA . Extra care and caution needs to be exercised by the consumer in the new world of health insurance and I would recommend seeking out the services of an experienced health insurance brokers in your marketplace to help you find the plan best suited to your needs and budget .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Something to consider when choosing a deductible is to ask yourself , what are you comfortable with paying if there is a loss vs. what you save . Here is a generic example . Say for example you want a $ 500.00 collision deductible for your car . Now you may be considering a $ 1000.00 deductible to save you a little money . And for example going to a $ 1000.00 deductible vs. a $ 500.00 deductible will save you $ 50.00 every six months . That is $ 100.00 in your pocket annually . It would take you 5 years to break even vs. what you save and what you could potentially pay out and then you are money ahead . This is one good way to weigh the options of what deductible to take and help you make an intelligent decision .
Health Savings Accounts were by law set-up to be paired with a specific type of high deductible health insurance plan . So , one must accompany the other . Each year the IRS announces the guidelines for what the range of acceptable deductible levels are for HSA qualified health insurance plans and the maximum amounts people can contribute to their Health Savings Account . Qualified high deductible health insurance plans for 2014 can have a deductible starting at $ 1250 for individual coverage and $ 2500 for family coverage . The maximum out-of-pocket exposure under these plans can be no more than $ 6350 for an individual and $ 12,700 for a family . The maximum an individual under the age of 55 can contribute to a Health Savings Account in this year is $ 3300 for an individual and $ 6550 for a family . Persons 55 + can contribute an additional $ 1000 to their HSA account . The amounts that persons contribute to their Health Savings Account is 100 % deductible from their gross income and can accumulate tax free and as long as withdrawals from the HSA are for covered medical expenses there are no tax consequences for the use of these funds . HSA funds can be accessed for non-eligible expenses but such withdrawals are subject to a tax penalty .
Excellent question ! You essentially have 3 main variations on the theme when purchasing ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance ; 1 -RRB- Conventional plan designs with office visit & prescription copays and lower deductibles -LRB- pretty pricey these days -RRB- 2 -RRB- High deductible health insurance plans designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- or a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- - becoming more common . 3 -RRB- Plans that fall in between , here you may see a plan with office visit copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , plans with prescription copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , or plans with more moderate deductible levels with all services subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance requirements but that also do n't meet the IRS requirements for being an HSA eligible plan . Simple , right ? First , determine if the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use are in-network providers for the plan you are interested in . Second , review you health and your history of health care consumption . Your needs and usage at 27 will probably be much different than when you are 47 . Try to pick a plan that you believe will meet your needs in the coming year at the best value . Determine if the plan you are interested in allows for direct access to specialists or whether it requires you to be referred out by your primary care physician first . Neither approach is bad but you should understand how you are supposed to access care in order to maximize your benefits and minimize your costs . Ask what your coverage is when you are outside of your immediate area . Increasingly you may find that you only have emergency care outside of a plan 's `` service area '' or perhaps no coverage at all . Do you have special needs ? A chronic illness or injury that requires ongoing treatment or expensive prescription medication requires extra homework . For example , some health plan 's pharmacy benefits cover HIV/AIDS medications at the lowest level -LRB- to them , highest for you -RRB- possible . Finally , compare monthly premiums . The lowest monthly cost , while always attractive , many not really be the lowest annual cost for you once you factor in some or all of the issues I have pointed out above . It may be worth another $ 50 a month in premiums to have a prescription copay instead of a deductible of up to $ 6300 to meet before your expensive medication is covered .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
The deductible is the amount you pay when you have a claim . What happens is the insurance company adjuster will estimate the damage -LRB- sometimes they ask you to get estimates from contractors -RRB- , and arrive at a total amount to do the repair . They subtract the deductible from the repair total and pay you what is left . Some companies have specific wind/hail deductibles or other coverage specific deductibles , so you should refer to your contract for what your deductible is .
We insurance people like to use all sorts of acronyms , it keeps us mysterious and sexy . CDHP is the abbreviation for Consumer Directed Health Plan . This is a bit of a fuzzy designation but it is generally used in reference to a high deductible health insurance policy meant to be tied to a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA - see more mysterious letters -RRB- . An example would be a health insurance policy with a deductible of $ 6350 for an individual followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that -LRB- this is the maximum allowable in 2014 -RRB- . This plan would have no office visit , emergency room or prescription copayments with all covered services subject to the $ 6350 deductible . The premium for such a plan design should be meaningfully less than that of a lower deductible plan with copayments . The high deductible health plan policyholder is supposed to take their premium savings and set them aside in a Health Savings Account from which they pay for their routine expenses such as office visits and prescriptions . The amounts a person sets aside in an HSA reduce their net taxable income which reduces their taxes thus saving them not only premium dollars but tax dollars . Unused funds in the HSA can rollover from year-to-year and accumulate on a tax deferred basis over time to build up a financial nest egg that can be tapped into in a person 's Medicare eligibility years to pay for future medical expenses .
The quick answer is that if you have an S Corporation you get the full deduction for your health insurance howeer it transfers to line 29 Self-employed health insurance deduction on your 1040 form . As an example if I have health insurance for my employees that also covers me as an owner , I write one check for the health insurance premium on a company check . My portion of the health insurance flows to my personal tax return on line 29 so I get the full deduction . You may want to check with your CPA about this deduction . .
A deductible is the amount of dollars that you are responsible for in the event of a claim . Of course , if there is another driver involved who is at fault and is insured , you will most likely pay nothing at all , depending on where you live . You can select the deductible on your vehicles , with lower deductibles costing more than higher deductibles . For example , if you have a $ 500 deductible on your car insurance collision benefit , and the damages are $ 4500 , you will have to pay $ 500 of that amount . In some scenarios , $ 500 is deducted from the check that is given to you from the insurer . The same concept applies to a comprehensive claim such as fire , vandalismor theft . When there is glass breakage , you may have no deductible . Also , generally , comprehensive deductibles are less than collision deductibles on most policies . A reputable national website or experienced broker can easily review your deductible options and quickly determine which amount is the most cost-effective .
Renters Insurance will have a deductible based upon what coverage and deductible options you choose and what the insurance carrier offers . You may have a deductible as small as $ 50 or as high as $ 1,000 or more . However , the deductible options available typically coincide with the coverage amount you are purchasing for your personal property/contents limit ; the higher the contents coverage limit requested the bigger the deductible you may be able to choose . Deductible increments may range from $ 50 , $ 250 , $ 500 , $ 1,000 or $ 2,500 .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Is Car Insurance For New Drivers In Arizona ?
Great Question . A new driver in Arizona can expect to pay around $ 60 - $ 200 a month depends on factors . Type of car the age of the new driver If they are a student for not the are they live in if they are single or married and finally the type of coverage they required or need .
The cost of auto insurance will vary depending on a number of factors , including your age , where you live , the type of vehicles you drive and how good -LRB- or bad ! -RRB- your driving record is . If you are currently insured , that will also likely reduce your cost . A young single driver with multiple tickets and accidents is likely to pay the highest premium . And conversely , a married driver with a clean driving record will pay less . Of course , the coverage , including liability limits and deductibles will impact the rate . Specifically , monthly rates could be as low as $ 30 - $ 40 for some drivers and much much higher for others . The state where you reside will be a major determinant in the price of coverage . While a state such as New Jersey may have fairly high rates , other states such as Ohio will feature lower rates . To get a specific and accurate quote , an independent broker or a reputable car insurance website will provide prices from multiple carriers which will help you find the best deal . Whether you live in Arizona , Michigan or any other state , the quotes are free .
Arizona does not . No-fault auto insurance has the insurance company pay for your damages no matter who 's at fault . In Arizona , we have uninsured and underinsured -LRB- UM/UIM -RRB- insurance for damages other people cause to you if they do n't have insurance or have enough . With state law , you have to sign whether or not you want UM/UIM coverage . Things UM/UIM may cover : A driver hitting you who does n't have insurance A driver hitting you who has insufficient coverage for your hospital bills A hit and run driver A driver who hits you while you 're walking or cycling Your medical bills when you 're a passenger in someone else 's vehicle and they have an accident -LRB- when the other driver 's insurance or theirs is insufficient -RRB- . UM/UIM is an excellent option for people looking for no-fault insurance . In fact , at our agency , we recommend UM/UIM to every one of our policyholders . If you have any questions , do n't hesitate to reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Great Question . A new driver in Arizona can expect to pay around $ 60 - $ 200 a month depends on factors . Type of car the age of the new driver If they are a student for not the are they live in if they are single or married and finally the type of coverage they required or need .
To see how much life insurance costs in Arizona , you can go to a website that offers life insurance in Arizona , and that also offers instant life insurance quotes . You will see how much the rate is for someone with your gender , age , build and health conditions -LRB- if the quote engine gives you those variables -RRB- , and be able to input different face amounts and term lengths to see how they vary .
Great Question . Insurance is the Law in Arizona you must have at least liability insurance to operate a car and also to get your car plates in Arizona . The cost is not very expensive for liability insurance in Arizona ranges are $ 40 - $ 60 a month for that type of coverages .
To get a resident life insurance license in Arizona , you need to take the licensing test and then pass the stringent test . Some prospective agents attend classes , seminars or webinars to assist them in learning the material . Once the test is passed , you submit evidence of that to the Arizona Department of Insurance and pay the fees needed to be licensed as a life insurance agent in the state of Arizona .
Great question . Cobra cost a lot in Arizona . If you have been laid of your work and in good health than cobra is the most expensive option for you . You can apply on your own and get individual insurance for much less money than cobra in Arizona . Please call your local agent for detail .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
The Arizona Department of Insurance regulates life insurance in Arizona . They do not do so on a policy by policy basis , but by establishing and enforcing policy provisions such as grace periods , free look periods , exam requirements , and death benefit processing . The Director of Insurance for the AZ Dept of Insurance at this time is Germaine Marks .
With the exception of a few states , most notably New York , life insurance rates are the same from state to state . Arizona rates reflect the same rates when compared to most states . The may be however , an underwriting disposition for Melanoma , which is n't a rate items as much as it is selective underwriting by life insurance companies .
Renters insurance can vary in price base on many different factors . In Arizona a typical $ 20,000 in personal property , $ 100,000 in liability policy costs around $ 13/month . If you 're in Arizona you can call my office for a free quote -LRB- 480-985-6141 -RRB- , otherwise contact your local Allstate agent and they can run together a quote very quickly for you .
Life insurance proceeds in Arizona are not taxable if left to a beneficiary other than the estate . If the estate is the beneficiary , or if the named beneficiaries on the policy are no longer alive , income tax will apply . Federal estate taxes are charged if the life insurance proceeds plus the value of the estate exceed the exempted amount of $ 5,250,000 in 2013 . Only the excess amount is taxed . Arizona does not have a state estate or inheritance tax .
Generally , children will be covered under their parent 's auto insurance as long as they 're a dependent and/or living at home . In Arizona , all household drivers must be listed on the policy , whether they drive or not . If they do n't drive , they 're to be excluded . Of course , once your children are self-sufficient , you 'll want them to get their own policies and , as a rule of thumb , you 'll want them to get their own insurance as soon as they 're able .
Insurance prices in general are a function of a multitude of factors . However , when referring to Arizona auto insurance prices in specific , you 'll notice that prices have risen over the past few years . Here are a few of the reasons why : A high percentage of uninsuredand underinsured drivers , a significantly higher cost to pay for medical and litagation related expenses , more vehicles on the road leading to more auto accidents , increaesd value of vehicles , increased cost to repair and replace vehicles and an increasing amount of fraudulant claims . When determining if you should lower your insurance coveragesto offset rising pricesplease consult a professional insurance agent ! Joel Guilbert Liberty Mutual Insurance 480-685-7309
If 5 different people got disability insurance in Arizona , chances are they would end up with 5 different companies . There are some plans that are best for physicians , some are best for laborers , some for self employed persons . This is in addition to the difference in price for persons of different ages and health , and looking for different features in the policy . To find the best disability insurance premium in Arizona for you , it is best to talk to a broker who really knows his/her stuff . You will end up with the right plan and may save money over going with what you thought was the best company in the state .
Each car in the household is rated on a specific driver . The impact of an inexperienced driver is placed on one car in the household . If the inexperienced driver is the third driver in a two car household the new driver will be assigned as occasional to one of the vehicles . The impact is more significant if the vehicle is new and insured for liability , comprehensive and collision . Some people buy an additional older car so that the inexperienced driver will be assigned to that car . I do not understand the logic in adding two older cars .
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To File A Claim With Renters Insurance ?
The whole issue of filing a claim presents a problem . Property claims are actually rare . Property insurers traditionally give either premium discounts or deductible discounts based on the period of time the policy has been claims-free . It is possible that a small claim would result in a loss of these discounts and the actual out-of-pocket expenses that you experience would be more than the amount recovered . There is also the matter of mitigation which means that you can often contain the expense of a claim . This might cost you but your net out of pocket expenses might be reduced . The bottom line is to know your agent , know your deductible , and make sure both of you know the discounts you might already be receiving , before you call that 800 number . If the house is on fire , dont wait !
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
In order to file a claim on your renters insurance you simply need to call the company you have the insurance with . No different then filing an auto insurance claim . The insurance carrier that you have your renters insurance with will take the information and assign a claim adjuster to work with you on your particular claim .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Great question ! The damage should be covered , but if it costs less to fix it than your deductible is , you may be better off not filing a claim . For example , let 's say the damage to repair your window is $ 200 . Your deductible is $ 500 . Your insurance is only going to pay anything over the $ 500 mark , so you will end up paying for the window regardless . It may not make sense to file a claim , pay for the window yourself , and then watch your rate go up . If you have renters insurance , and the car was in your apartment parking lot , there may be coverage there , depending upon the terms of your renters insurance . If you did not file a police report , I 'd recommend that you do , it will help you if you ever need documentation of damage and help collect on your claim . If you need help , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
There are 2 ways to file a claim you can contact the carrier claim number that is listed on your policy or you can contact your agent that wrote your policy . I Always instruct our clients to contact us 1st that way we can document your file and make sure that your claim has been process right away and filed correctly . having to file a claim is stressful enough a good agent should be able to guide you through the process
Claim history is a big factor for insurance companies but just because you have a claim does n't mean your rate is going to increase . Several factors are used to determine a rate including the length of time you have been with an insurance company , credit , type of claim filed , amount of claim , castropheclaimsect . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover `` sudden and accidental '' losses . It is not a maintenance policy and you do not want to file small claims . Filing frequent , small claims will cause your rateto increase or your policy may be cancelled .
If it is the Insured person and Policy Owner who has the claims against them , and they die and leave the life insurance proceeds to a beneficiary , the beneficiary does not have to pay the claims of the Insured unless they co-signed for that debt . If there is no beneficiary and the life insurance money ends up in the estate , creditor claims can be filed during probate . If it is the beneficiary who has the claims against them , it depends on the state of residence as to whether a claim can be filed against the beneficiary 's life insurance proceeds , and/or how much of the death benefit is subject to creditor claims .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
In most cases , you do not need to file a claim to Medicare , as doctors/hospitals are required to file these claims for you in a timely manner for Medicare-covered services and supplies . If , however , your doctor has not filed a claim , you can contact them and ask them to do so or call Medicare at 1-800-MEDICARE . If it is close to the time limit -LRB- 12 months -RRB- and your doctor has not filed the claim , you can do so using Medicare 's Patient Request for Medicare Payment Form -LRB- CMS-1490S -RRB- . WEBSITELINK
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
Contacting your agent may not necessarily result in increased premium but reporting a claim might . Your agent is very unlikely to know how much your rates may increase if you were to file a claim . Keep this simple rule in mind : The less claims you file through insurance company the better . You are better off paying a small claim out of pocket . Let the insurance company handle your large claims . Even not at faults and comp claims will have some impact on your rates with most companies .
To submit a claim for bodily injury , property damage or damage to personal property on your renters policy , contact either your agent or the direct number provided by your insurance company . Before you file the claim you should understand that the claim might trigger an increase in future premiums . If the damage is near the deductible you might pay less by not filing the claim . Discuss this with your agent if you have the time . If you are sued , notify the company immediately .
Immediately ! Call your agent or insurer and get started on that process . Claims can take a while to resolve or they can be resolved quickly . If you have a police report or evidence ready to go as soon as you file your claim , it can often get fixed faster . That said , you can usually submit your evidence after the initial filing . I 'm not aware of any company that wo n't let you submit evidence after filing your claim but there are a lot of companies out there . Long-short of it , file as soon as possible .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Can I Compare Health Insurance Quotes In Indiana ?
Comparing health insurance quotes in Indiana is very simple and you 'll be able to view the best prices from the top-rated companies . Typically , utilizing an experienced broker 's website will yield you the best rates . As an experienced broker myself , with a premier trusted website , we utilize modern software and are able to research and find the best offers . The Indiana Health Insurance Exchange allows you to apply for many affordable plans through Anthem and a few other carriers . No medical questions need to be answered and during Open Enrollment , your acceptance is virtually guaranteed . The new Marketplace will also provide a federal tax subsidy of your income is under 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level .
Comparing health insurance quotes in Indiana is very simple and you 'll be able to view the best prices from the top-rated companies . Typically , utilizing an experienced broker 's website will yield you the best rates . As an experienced broker myself , with a premier trusted website , we utilize modern software and are able to research and find the best offers . The Indiana Health Insurance Exchange allows you to apply for many affordable plans through Anthem and a few other carriers . No medical questions need to be answered and during Open Enrollment , your acceptance is virtually guaranteed . The new Marketplace will also provide a federal tax subsidy of your income is under 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level .
Brandon is right . That is way too broad of a question to answer specifically . But there are studies that are done every year comparing auto insurance premiums from state to state . In the 2014 study , Indiana ranked # 12 in the country for having the lowest auto insurance premium . Compared to most states , Indiana does n't have that many coverage requirements as other states do .
Low cost health insurance in Indiana is available and can be purchased from an experienced broker -LRB- with the help of their website -RRB- . Anthem and UnitedHealthcare are two of the biggest carriers in the state . They offer a wide variety of single , family and business healthcare plans . As a broker for more than 32 years , our job is to determine which plan best matches the needs you have and the budget you have to work with . The Indian Health Insurance Exchange has an Open Enrollment that offers four types of plans with financial subsidies . Do you qualify for subsidies ? Which plan is the most economical ? Will your pre-existing conditions be covered ? These are some of the topics that our websites offer along with free online quoting and comparison of plans . Indiana has many affordable options .
With more than 33 years of experience as a broker -LRB- and fully licensed in Indiana -RRB- , I 'll answer your question . That depends . I know ... That 's not a specific answer . But there are many variables that impact the rate ... such as your age , where in Indiana you live , the type of coverage etc. . . A federal subsidy may also drastically reduce your rate . Many of my Hoosier clients are quite surprised when notified of the magnitude of the discount .
There are many affordable health insurance plans in Indiana , thanks to the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare . What reduces rates -LRB- often dramatically -RRB- , is the federal subsidy that is based on your household income . Often , this can generate financial help of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 per year . And this money is automatically deducted from the premium . Anthem typically offers the the lowest rates , although Humana is competitive in many areas . Both individual and family plans are available along with coverage for small businesses . If household income is too high to qualify for a subsidy , off-Exchange plans can be purchased from the participating major carriers . Where do you get the best rates ? Typically , an experienced broker website will offer the lowest prices along with expert advice . There are never fees or charges for utilizing this type of assistance . I should know since I 'm an Indiana health insurance broker and have been in the business for 33 years . But it does n't seem that long !
When a beneficiary in Indiana collects the death benefit from a life insurance policy upon the death of the insured person , the life insurance proceeds are protected from creditors in Indiana . Creditors could go after the life insurance proceeds if the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debts of the Insured . They could also collect on the life insurance money if the beneficiary was left to the estate .
Yes possibly . Indiana has an inheritance tax that life insurance can be included in . Spouses are exempt , but most other kin and non-related persons to the insured could incur the inheritance tax . In Indiana the tax ranges from 1 to 20 % and is due 9 months after death .
Effective 1/1/2014 nobody can be denied health insurance in Indiana or any other state in the country . However , you will need to enroll in a policy during the enrollment period or else you 'll be unable to get insurance unless you fall under a special enrollment circumstance . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run your own personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
Yes , the Farm Bureau does offer life insurance . You can contact your state Farm Bureau to find an agent . Or you can get a quote via the internet from United Home Life , of whom the parent company is United Farm Family Life Insurance Co , which operates as a subsidiary of the Indiana Farm Bureau . UHL provides life insurance in most states .
That would depend on which state you 're comparing it to . but overall , Indiana is on the lower end as far as auto insurance premium . There are companies who track state averages . In the most recent 2014 rankings that includes 50 states + D.C. , Indiana ranked 12th for the least expensive state .
During Open Enrollment , you can not be denied health insurance in Indiana -LRB- assuming you meet eligibility guidelines -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- also provides a federal subsidy that can potentially reduce your premium . The amount is based on household income . When Open Enrollment ends , assuming you do not have a qualifying event , a short-term policy -LRB- which is not ACA-compliant -RRB- can be applied for . But you CAN be denied for this type of coverage .
The most popular plan offered by the Colonial Penn Life Insurance Company is their guaranteed acceptance life insurance . The maximum face amount offered for that product is $ 8,000 . They do offer a few other products as well , with the maximum face amount of $ 50,000 for one and $ 25,000 for the rest . As far as I know , their life insurance is fine . Since it does not require an exam , you may be able to find lower prices elsewhere for those aimed to persons with good health . Their parent company , CNO Financial Group , is based in Indiana . Colonial Penn Life Insurance Company is rated B + + by AM Best .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
Car insurance is priced based on risk of a specific situation , so there is a lot of variation in price from person to person depending on his or her risk profile . With this understanding , according to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners , the average cost of auto insurance in the state of Indiana is about $ 625 per year .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
Life insurance is not charged income tax in Indiana or any other state , as long as the beneficiary is a person . If the beneficiary is the estate , the proceeds will be subject to income tax . Also , interest paid on the face amount for cash value policies can be taxed . Federal and state estate taxes also are charged on the excess over the exempt amount .
It is really impossible to say any one company is `` best '' for all situations . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents all the major companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . If you are eligible for financial assistance from the Affordable Care act , you should also make sure the agent you speak to is certified to sell on the exchange . There are only a small number of companies offering `` Omabacare '' plans in Indiana at this time . In some counties , Anthem Blue Cross is the only company available on the exchange at all . They do offer several different plans , with varying costs and coverage .
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Deal With Auto Insurance Claim Adjusters ?
Although more information is needed to adequately address this very general question , a few points can be made . I am going to make the assumption that you are talking about physical damage to your vehicle , with no injury . If you are asking about dealing with the person who will physically inspect your vehicle , they or someone on their behalf should first contact you , to set up an inspection at your convenience . This is really an ` appraiser ' of the damages although they may also possess claim settlement authority to settle your claim on-site , in certain non-injury situations . If you are talking about a typical inside claim adjuster , expect a call from them , asking you to provide the details of the accident . After assessing the facts , the adjuster 's job is to make you whole for your loss , depending upon the liability circumstances involved . In both instances , you should expect to be treated with respect whether you are the policyholder or the person whose vehicle was damaged by another party . If you are not pleased with the process , tell the appraiser or adjuster so and then ask to speak to their superior . Hope this helps somewhat but a lot more information is needed to really help you .
An insurance adjuster either works for the insurance company or is a 3rd party representative hired by the insurance company . In regards to an auto insurance claim , the adjustor will review the circumstances of the accident/damage as well as review the policy language to determine if in fact the damage is covered by the insurance policy . If the damage is to be covered then the adjuster will inspect the damage to the vehicle and determine the payment amount . The aduster is the primary point person in dealing with your auto claim . Sometimes you might have mulitple adjusters on a claim like an in-house adjuster and a field adjuster as well .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
There is really only 1 renters policy . However , the coverage included can vary . Some policies are written on an Actual Cash Value basis , where other policies are written on a Full Content Replacement basis . Let me explain the difference . Let 's say you went out and bought a brand new TV that cost you $ 1000 today . Three years from now , it gets damaged and you submit a claim under your Renters policy . On the Actual Cash Value policy , the claim adjuster would look up the make and model of your TV , and find that it is no longer selling for $ 1000 . That model now sells for $ 400 . But the $ 400 would be for a brand now unit out of the box , where your TV was 3 years old , so they further reduce the claim based on depreciation . You 're left with $ 250 - and you still need to pay your $ 100 deductible . Not a good day . With Full Contents Replacement coverage , the claims adjuster looks at how much you spent on the TV , not the make and model , and your claim is processed for $ 1000 -LRB- minus your $ 100 deductible -RRB- . And since technology has improved over the past three years , you now have the choice to purchase the same TV you had -LRB- which is selling for only $ 400 now remember ? -RRB- or purchase a better TV with better features than the one that was damaged . Not a bad day at all ! Although the Actual Cash Value policy will cost less , you wind up getting less in the end . Remember , just because one policy is cheaper than another , does n't mean it 's a better deal . Always consult with a licensed , professional insurance agent to help determine which policy is best for your needs .
Although more information is needed to adequately address this very general question , a few points can be made . I am going to make the assumption that you are talking about physical damage to your vehicle , with no injury . If you are asking about dealing with the person who will physically inspect your vehicle , they or someone on their behalf should first contact you , to set up an inspection at your convenience . This is really an ` appraiser ' of the damages although they may also possess claim settlement authority to settle your claim on-site , in certain non-injury situations . If you are talking about a typical inside claim adjuster , expect a call from them , asking you to provide the details of the accident . After assessing the facts , the adjuster 's job is to make you whole for your loss , depending upon the liability circumstances involved . In both instances , you should expect to be treated with respect whether you are the policyholder or the person whose vehicle was damaged by another party . If you are not pleased with the process , tell the appraiser or adjuster so and then ask to speak to their superior . Hope this helps somewhat but a lot more information is needed to really help you .
Great question . The way auto policies are rated today includes a myriad of factors and that makes it difficult to predict premiums . The factors include the personal details of drivers , including their driving records and their credit reports and the year , make and model of the auto . You may be surprised to find that an `` expensive '' Lincoln costs less to insure than a `` less expensive '' compact car . Why ? Because little cars are more easily totaled in an accident and total loss claims are more expensive than simple repairs to a heavier vehicle ! In general if there are no changes to all the moving parts , you may expect your rate to be stable and perhaps go down over time if you have no claims . Another interesting factor is your carrier 's position in the local market . For example , in Florida there is a lot of market volatility and carriers come and go in the market . A new carrier may have aggressively low rates as they are eager to write more business and get market share . Going with that carrier may be a good deal for the first year or two , but you may well see big increases at renewal as the carrier adjusts their position in the market .
With regard to automobile insurance , there are two most common types of ` Adjusters ' . A major distinction is that one handles the various aspects of a particular claim , usually without ever seeing the vehicle in person , while the other type of Adjuster is responsible for actually looking at the vehicles or vehicles and assessing the damage amounts . The latter is often also referred to as an appraiser . But they are ` adjusting ' the loss . The former would typically assign the appraiser -LRB- outside adjuster -RRB- to look at the vehicles or vehicles . The outside adjuster might also view the accident site and determine a theory of liability and advise the ` inside adjuster ' . There are variations but these two types of ` adjusters ' are most often encountered in claims situations .
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
When the insured receives payment of an adjusted claim , the property that is damaged becomes the property of the insurance company . Often that damaged property is of little value . However , particularly in the case of an automobile , the car may be salvaged and the insurance company may realize part or all of the adjusted claim payment . The term comes primarily from ocean marine insurance . Often a ship will have a fire in the hold . An adjuster will fly out to the ship while it is underway , evaluate the loss and the insurance company may adjust the claim before the ship even reaches port . That portion of the property that has been declared as loss becomes the property of the insurance company . There are companies that specialize in salvaged property . This is most commonly seen in the cases of ships but could apply to other forms of recovery . While I am not sure of the legal interpretation , this clause might extend to the insurance company the right to claim any gain that an insured might have on property that was declared as a total loss , and then sold to a salvage company .
It depends on the insurer as to what Adjustable Life is . There were a couple of midwestern companies who had products with that moniker which were fixed premium adjustable life insurance products . Universal Life one of the dominant forms of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life which is the official name of the product . So , it may be that you are asking about Universal Life . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
When the adjuster finishes a claim , they make an offer essentially . A policyholder , particularly in California is not obligated to accept that offer . In the case of auto insurance it normally means that the adjuster has an estimate in hand for the work necessary . Once the work starts , additional damage may be discovered and the adjuster will re-evaluate the claim . If you disagree with the amount of the settlement you can still take the car to whoever you wish and they will go through the same process . It could be that the company will not reimburse for the full bill for your selected repair shop . There are arbitration and legal actions available to come to some sort of agreement . If your concern is over fault , that is an entirely different matter and there is a formal process that ends in arbitration . Once the claim is arbitrated the percentage of fault is assigned and the company is bound by the order .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Auto insurance adjusters are paid by the hour in most cases just like any other job . How much an adjuster will make varies by the market the adjuster is currently lives in . Certain regions of the country are less and certain are more . Many carriers will offer benefits such as medical , dental , vision and even 401k plans . Also many carriers will train you but require you have a bachelors degree . If you are interested do a search . Many insurance carriers are always looking for adjusters .
Health insurance issuers -LRB- i.e. , licensed entities -RRB- in the individual and small group markets must consider all enrollees in all non-grandfathered health plans issued in a particular state to be members of a single risk pool when developing rates and premiums for plan years -LRB- in the individual market , policy years -RRB- effective on or after Jan. 1 , 2014 . Each issuer must have one individual market pool and one small group market pool in each applicable state . States may choose to require issuers merge these pools . The final rule also requires : Each issuer in a state will have an index rate for each of the individual and small group pools for each plan year -LRB- policy year , in the individual market -RRB- . The index rate is based on the total combined claims costs for providing essential health benefits within the single risk pool . If there is not enough claims data available , issuers may use any reasonable source of claims data , including claims from grandfathered business . There may be market-wide adjustments for risk adjustment and reinsurance programs as well as Exchange user fees . Premium rates for a particular plan may vary from the market-wide index rate only by several enumerated factors . For example , issuers may modify the market-wide index rate at the individual plan level to adjust for administrative costs -LRB- other than Exchange user fees -RRB- , so long as actuarially justified . Plan-specific adjustments to the market-wide index rate must not reflect differences in health status or risk selection . Issuers are expected to use pooled allowable claims data as a basis for calculating the plan-specific actuarial value instead of using the HHS actuarial value calculator . Fair Health Insurance Premiums -LRB- applies to non-grandfathered plans -RRB- - Health insurance issuers may vary the premium rate charged to a specific non-grandfathered individual or small group from the rate established for that particular plan only based on the following factors : family size -LRB- individual or family -RRB- , geography -LRB- rating area -RRB- , age -LRB- within a ratio of 3:1 for adults -RRB- and tobacco use -LRB- within a ratio of 1.5:1 -RRB- .
This is a great topic for one peculiar reason . Many folks in the US have forced placed insurance . This is the mortgage company taking over responsibility for securing coverage when you as the property owner have failed to do so . The main problem is that forced placed insurance is usually very expensive and imposed on the least educated consumers . Take charge your life and buy your insurance wherever you find the right coverage at the right price . Be as diligent in pursuit of a '' good deal '' on your homeowners insurance as you would on auto insurance . There are substantial variations in the coverages under a homeowners policy much more so than on an auto policy : here is why : Auto insurance protects you in your involvement with others so the greatest protection is for damages , Bodily injury or Property Damage that you do to others . So you are more often dealing with third party -LRB- the first party is the you , the second party is the insurer , and the third party is the one you injure -RRB- . Section II of a homeowners policy involves third party liability , but most of the property losses in general are first party payments by the insurer . Your house is hit by a tornado , Your insurer has to respond to you ! so , look at the nuances of coverages offered by insurers . They are many : including such things as scheduled property , water and sewer back up , automatic extension of dwelling limits , law and ordinance coverage , mold remediation , and so on . If you do n't understand the coverages offered ask your agent for an example of how a coverage would be used . An educated consumer is a better consumer .
Your Insurance is only as good as your agent . Cheap rates does not mean the carrier is n't any good but they key is to make sure that you are covered properly and protected . I have seen time and time again that an agent will sell you something with the wrong value of your home all because they wanted to keep your business . I have use many carriers to compare rates with and Mutual companies on many occasions can cost much less . Please make sure to talk to an agent and make sure you are using a replacement cost for your home this is not the same as a appraisal that you get from the bank . Service is another thing to think about example . Our agency answers the phone 24/7 Make sure that your not stuck calling a 800 number for claims when you have a loss . Nothing is more frustrating then dealing with a loss and being told oh call this 800 number and they will take care of your claim . If your agent is n't filing the claim and actively calling your adjuster and making sure that you and your needs are taken care of then I would look to see what works best for you . Are you shopping for just the rate or are you looking for a carrier and an agent that will be there when you need it .
There are many factors that go into the rating of your policy . One of those is the base rate your insurance company files with the state . Everything is calculated off the base rate and insurance companies usually adjust their rates at least once per year . There will be a rate effective date buried somewhere within your policy but you may not see it easily . They will adjust their rates based on their experience for the last year and they can go up or down depending on how the claims have been . You 'll also see the coverage A -LRB- dwelling -RRB- get adjusted every year . As construction costs change , so will the coverage on your home -LRB- just a hint , they usually do n't go down -RRB- . Then there are a few other factors that may affect your rates : insurance score , claims , changes in coverage or deductibles . They all go into the rating calculation . Do yourself a favor and read your renewal -LRB- you 'd be surprised how many people do n't -RRB- . You 'll be able to track what 's happening and look for anything that might not be right . If you have a question , talk to your agent . He/she should be happy to go through it with you .
It certainly depends on the carrier , the type of claim , and how much damage was caused . If you are talking about a `` catastrophe '' claim this can take much longer because of the scope of damage and the number of people impacted . Sometimes insurance carriers will have to out-source a 3rd party to handle claim adjustments if the claim is that big like tornado damage that causes damage to many . If you are talking about a claim where the only damage was your residence you should expect to see a field adjuster within 3-5 business days to make the initial estimate . From there , a check could be issued as quick as 24 hours or another 3-5 business days . More than likely the first check you receive will be a partial based on the ACV of your personal property and dwelling .
Insurance companies will generally contact the other party to a claim before proceeding with a claim . The will in most instances take a statement from both parties before proceeding . Without speaking to the claims adjuster , it is difficult to know why the claims adjuster choose to proceed with claim without getting all the facts . This is not the norm . Generally speaking insurance companies will not pay a claim until they speak with both parties
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Why Do You Need A Medicare Supplement ?
Medicare Supplements pay the coinsurance and deductibles you would have under original Medicare.On day in the hospital with original Medicare nearly $ 1200 in deductible under part A. Any part B expense is covered at 80 % . The part A deductible is not calender year , it is best on coverage periods . You could conceivable have to pay this up to four times per year . There is no ceiling on the amount you would have to pay under part B so if your health condition is serious you could conceivably be responsible for over $ 10,000 in medical costs . Medicare Supplements will pay those costs .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
AARP Medicare Supplement Plans are insured by United Healthcare . United Healthcare pays a royalty fee to AARP to have them sponsor their Medicare Supplement plans and that is why you must be a member of AARP in order to apply for one of their Supplements . AARP sponsors the plan they are not providing the insurance coverage or paying the claims . After the Medicare Supplement has been issued and in benefit you do do have to renew your AARP membership if you choose not to in order to keep your Supplement .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
Choosing a Medicare Plan can seem confusing when doing it for the first time . You have several things to consider . First , do you want a Medicare Supplement Plan or a Medicare Advantage plan ? Sometimes , people like to compare plans online first just to get an idea and they can do that on our website . However , it is important to also to speak with an independent agent that can explain the pros and cons of each plan and how that plan may fit your needs the best . You will always be able to tell a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- or a Medigap Plan -RRB- because they have a letter like Plan F or Plan G , etc. . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is actually great health insurance . Some of the great things about a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is : 1 . No Network - you can go to any doctor or hospital you want . If they take Medicare , they take the supplement . 2 . No referral needed to go to a specialist . 3 . Once you have a plan , the benefits on that plan can not change from year to year . 4 . No large out of pocket surprises when you go to the doctor or hospital
In addition to getting Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B in South Carolina , residents need to consider what type of Medicare Supplement Plan will be best for them . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . Some things to consider ... do you want the freedom to see any doctor you wish , without the need for a referral and benefits that do n't change from year to year ? A Medicare Supplement does all of these things and more . For more information about Medicare and to compare Medicare Supplement plans in South Carolina you can visit our website .
The coverage depends on if you are covered by Original Medicare -LRB- PartA & B -RRB- abd then you would typically also have a medicare supplement plus PartD coverage , or if you are covered by a Medicare AdvantAGE PLAN . Under original medicare you have to be hospitalized for three days and then admitted to the skilled nursing facility . It is important that this coverage is not available for CUSTODIAL CARE . Assuming the doctor certifies that skilled nursing care is needed medicare pays all costs for days 1 - 20 . For days 21-100 there is a copay of $ 148 for 2013 and then changes to $ 152 for 2014 . After 100 days you will realize why having a Medicare Supplement is so important and you need to understand the coverage limit of the policy you choose . With Medicare Advantage you are not required to be hospitalized for three days before being admitted to the Skilled Nursing Facility
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
why do doctors hate Medicare ? Mainly because Medicare payment rates to doctors are below what it costs them to run their office and procedures . So seeing too many Medicare patients can hurt a doctor 's practice . That is why so many limit how many Medicare patients they will see without supplement plans to accompany the Medicare coverage .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- are good plans if you are in good health and not using a lot of medical services . In Alabama where I practice MA Plans have high out of pocket cost for people with serious or chronic health problems , as much as $ 6700 in a calendar year . The problem I see with MA Plans is that people start out using them when they are in good health but once your health changes and you have to use your MA Plan more and more you become unhappy with your out of pocket cost for Medicare covered services . If you become unhappy with your MA Plan and want to switch to a Medicare Supplement you may not be able to if you have serious health problems or you may pay a much higher premium because of your health . My professional recommendation is to get a Medicare Supplement even if you are in good health because you need a Medicare Health Plan that not only meets your needs today but will continue to meet your needs as you get older and your health care needs change . If you wait until you need a Medicare Supplement because your health has changed you may not be able to . Insurance companies that offer Medicare Supplement Plans can and do turn down people that have serious pre-existing health conditions .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Which Company Has The Best Long Term Care Insurance ?
You always need to match the long term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- company with client suitability . Suitability for -LRB- LTCi -RRB- is based the clients personal profile , risk tolerance and economic goals . Once thats established then we can review the LTCi company for pricing , contractual language and policy provisions that are consumer centric . But if Im forced to answer , my recommendation overall is to include Genworth in your research .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The cost of long term care exceeds the expectation of most people . Long term care can easily erode a substantial amount of money . Because traditional life insurance doesnt address the cost of long term care , these policies are important . The cost for long term care is increasing every year . Companies that once offered Long Term Care have withdrawn from the market . In response some life insurance companies are offering limited living benefits which would act like Long Term Care insurance by paying out part of the death benefit before death occurs .
The best Long Term Care insurance for one person may not be the best Long Term Care policy for another . Look at the rating of the company and the features of the policies they offer , in addition to see if they are priced competitively , their history of rate increases , and whether they have had many complaints against them . Above all , it is helpful to contact a Long Term Care broker -LRB- may Life insurance brokers also sell Long Term Care insurance -RRB- to help you find the best Long Term Care policy for you .
Long Term Care Insurance is smart if your family has a history of longevity or has a history of crippling disease . Long Term Care Insurance is smart if you have an estate that you would like to protect from being spent on extended care needs . Long Term Care Insurance is smart if you want to make choices about your long term care : where to live , which agency to hire , the ability to pay a relative to care for you in your home , etc. .
It is hard to say who has the best long term care insurance because each company has its own special features . What may be best for one person may not be best for another . In reality , less companies are carrying long term care insurance than in the past , and it is not hard to compare the features of 3 to 5 companies to see which has the best policy for you .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Hurricane Damage Covered In Home Insurance ?
It depends on where you live and the type of policy you have . In certain states you have to purchase separate Wind/Hail coverage so hurricane coverage is not included . In Virginia , wind/hail coverage is included in most policies unless you live near the coast . Coastal policies typically excluded wind/hail coverage or they will have a separate deductible . For example , you may have a $ 1,000 standard deductible but a 1 % - 5 % named storm or hurricane deductible . A percentage deductible is a big difference so make sure you are aware of what your policy includes .
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
Unless it is specifically excluded in your policy , any renters policy , not just Geico , will cover damage caused by hurricane or any other peril.Check with your agent to be sure of your particular policy but I am not aware of any company that excludes hurricanes or damage caused by hurricanes .
Primarily renter 's insurance is designed to protect your personal belongings that you have in your home that you rent . Renter 's insurance may replace items that are stolen from your home , or are damaged or destroyed by fire or flooding . You need to inquire with your insurance agent as to exactly what kinds of incidents are covered by any particular policy . For example in areas that are prone to hurricanes or tornadoes you may need to buy a rider in addition to the basic renter 's insurance , or you may need to buy hurricane insurance specifically .
USAA homeowner 's insurance covers hurricanes . Typically , hurricanes are considered wind damage and it is always a peril that is listed in your basic and comprehensive policies . However , resulting flood damage must be covered with a separate flood insurance policy which can be purchased through most brokers and agents . They can review the rates quite easily .
The property coverage you are afforded under renter 's coverage is for your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio systems , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- , but typically not for the building . If you are asking if your own personal property would be covered if a hurricane caused the damaged , then , yes , your personal property would be covered . However , there is one caveat ... if it was wind that was determined as the cause of loss . Hurricanes can cause damage not only by wind , but by flooding . If flooding -LRB- waters rising from outside -RRB- was the cause of loss , you may not be covered , because flood is typically excluded . You could possibly purchase flood coverage in this case .
Hurricane damage is covered in most renter 's policies with exceptions and limitations . Damage to the landscape may have incidental coverage . Certain items of personal property -LRB- money , jewelry , silverware , guns , for example -RRB- are subject to limits in the policy . If the damage is sustained due to flood , waves or an overflow of water that enters through an opening in the house or even through the sewer , damages may not be covered . If the direct cause of loss is power interruption , damages may not be covered .
It is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Different insurance companies may have different rules and rates filed with your state 's Insurance Department that may outline how they handle Hurricane damage . Some may cover it broadly , others may differentiate between hurricane and wind storm and still others may not cover it at all depending upon where you are located .
I think what you are asking is would a Homeowner 's policy provide support to stay in a hotel if your home is uninhabitable as a result of a covered loss . It is always a good idea to discuss the specific terms and conditions of your policy with your Insurance Professional , of course . However , in my experience here in CT , most Homeowners ' policies include coverage for `` extra expense '' incurred if you have to live elsewhere while your home is being repaired or rebuilt after a covered loss . This is usually necessary after a rather serious occurence that makes a home completely uninhabitable due to structural damage , a fire or hurricane for example . In the cases I have seen involving only electric power loss to a home , this is usually as a result of a storm . In situations like that , I have not seen a case where the home has been genuinely uninhabitable for an extended period of time . Power is usually restored within a few hours .
-- > Normal 0 You may first want to ask yourself the question , why am I buying homeowners insurance in the first place ? The most common answer is , should my home be damaged or destroyed , Id like to have enough money to fix or replace it . So that is a good place to start . How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? Its not an easy number to come up with but there are free tools available on the Internet to assist you with this effort -LRB- Google-Residential Replacement Cost Calculators -RRB- . Insurance companies normally do their own replacement cost estimates and will suggest or require certain minimum limits for specific types of coverage . Your lender , if you have one , may also have coverage requirements so your ultimate decision will be a combination of these factors . Just remember , you are the one buying the coverage and paying the premium . Make sure your needs and expectations are considered . The actual cost to rebuild your home will vary depending on local conditions following your loss . Hurricanes , tornadoes , wild fires and the like cause devastation to entire areas . Contractors , labor and materials may not be available at normal costs . Many insurance companies offer policies , which base the amount of insurance on normal building costs , but automatically increase the limit to whatever you need to rebuild your home should costs change dramatically following your claim . This feature is commonly referred to as Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost , make sure to consider this feature if it is available . Separate additional amounts of insurance will be included for your personal property , other non-business structures on your property and additional living expense . These limits are functions of the amount you carry on your home , normally they are more than adequate but make sure you are comfortable with them as they can be increased if necessary . The other major part of the policy will be your personal liability limit . That limit should be consistent with the liability limits you carry on your auto -LRB- s -RRB- and not less than $ 300,000 . If your net worth exceeds $ 300,000 , you may wish to consider Personal Umbrella coverage . Personal umbrellas are considered a less expensive way to purchase high liability limits . In addition , they usually provide broader coverage and do not have as many exclusions or limitations as basic liability policies .
some states have inordinate exposure to dangerous , even sever weather . The peninsula of Florida is exposed to tropical and hurricane conditions every year during the Atlantic hurricane season -LRB- June 1 to November 30 . -RRB- The history impact of these storms has devastating financial ramifications for personal property owners , resulting in higher home insurance premiums .
That is a great question ! Check with your agent to be certain , but you should be covered for the repairs . How bad was the damage ? If it 's just a few shingles , and the estimate is less than your deductible amount , you are wiser to not file a claim , as you 'd end up paying for it anyway , and you will spare yourself the chance of an increased premium as a result of the filed claim . You also may have problems because of the reason for the lost shingles . Hurricane damage , or tornado damage may not be covered with out a rider , where you live . Best bet ? Get a repair estimate , compare it to your deductible amount , and proceed from there . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
The answer depends on what happened to the glass . Was it broken by wind/fire/hail ? If so , it would be covered under a standard HO policy assuming the home was occupied . If it was intentionally broken by the homeowner it would not be covered because insurance policies exclude intentional acts . Keep in mind that you would be subject to your policy deductible . It may not make sense to put a claim in for something small like a broken window or screen door because you could experience increased insurance costs for making a claim . I would speak with your independent insurance agent and discuss the best way to proceed given your situation . Typically , I like to reserve using your home insurance for a catastrophic event like a hurricane , major fire or damaging storm . Hope this answer helps .
A homeowners insurance policy covers damage to the structure , loss of personal property , increased living expenses and some medical expenses if the damage is the result of a named peril . In some policies , the perils are specifically named , while in others the policy covers everything but the excluded perils . In any case , insurance companies have paid enormous sums to assist policyholders who were hit with a hurricane .
Oh , this is a great question ! This is one of those questions that really requires thatyou to look at your policy , and the way that it is worded . Many homeowners are in for a shock when they realize that water from the ground surge is n't covered , unless they have flood insurance , or a rider that includes it . Same with wind damage . Often , deductibles are higher when hurricane damage coverage is included , so that might give you an idea if it is covered in your policy . Get with your agent , and see . Depending upon where you live , and the company that you bought from , you may well be covered , but it never hurts to be certain , especially before you need to know . Thanks for asking !
It is possible that your Homeowners ' Insurance will cover loss due to hurricane , however , it is important that you discuss this directly with your Insurance Professional . In some areas , insurance companies may require higher deductibles for hurricane damage and others may exclude hurricane damage coverage all together . That is why it is important that you fully understand the terms and conditions of your particular policy .
Generally speaking yes . Windstorm is covered by your homeowners policy , but maybe treated separately by your policy as well . For example if you live in a coastal area wind coverage may be excluded and you obtain what coverage is available through a pooling arrangement such as a wind pool . For Example if you live in Galveston Texas you might you need three policies where as an inland customer would only need one.In Galveston your wind policy might be through the Texas Wind Insurance Association , your regular homeowners policy in the private market -LRB- exclusive of wind -RRB- . You may also be required to have a flood policy -LRB- from the National Flood Insurance Program -RRB- because your insurer does not want to see you in a dilemma of having one group say the damage was caused by wind borne water and another saying it is flood coverage after the loss . To keep your understanding of what is necessary visit with your agent and discuss your personal situation . One other thing I should mention is that depending on where you live you may have a separate , hurricane deductible , wind and hail deductible , named storm deductible . These are often per cent deductibles and can mean a substantial out of pocket costs in the event of a windstorm . They are not exclusively used in hurricane prone areas . For example in Austin Texas you might have a $ 1000 deductible for most homeowners coverage -LRB- perils -RRB- , but 1 % wind and hail deductible even though Austin is over 200 miles to the Gulf .
As always , it is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . If you are asking if a homeowners policy would pay to replace your older windows with replacement windows , unless the older windows had been severely damaged or destroyed by a covered peril , the odds are that your policy would not pay for the replacements . A Homeowners Insurance policy provides coverage to return your property to proper condition in the event that it has been damaged or lost due to some covered peril . Fire , severe wind , hurricane , lightening etc are some examples of these . Wear and tear is not .
The answer to this question is based entirely upon the carrier and the state . Most carriers offer a range of deductibles from $ 500 - $ 5000 . If you own a high end home , the deductibles offered can be in the $ 10,000 - $ 50,000 range . Another type of deductible you may see is a separate wind/hail deductible . Originally , these deductible were found on homes in the hurricane belt , but in recent years , the South & Midwest have resorted to this deductible due to the number of tornados , high straight-line winds & hail claims . Often , the wind/hail deductible is shown as a percentage of the replacement cost of the home . For example , a 5 % wind/hail deductible on a $ 400,000 home would be $ 20,000 . Other separate deductibles for other causes of loss might be earthquake & flood .
Typically , a Renters Insurance policy works the same way as any residential policy with respect to covered losses . For the most part , there are two loss causes that are excluded from coverage , namely Earth Movement and Flood . Coverage for Earth Movement may , in many cases , be endorsed onto the policy , but the only way to have coverage for flood damage is to have a Flood Insurance policy . It is important to discuss this with your Insurance Professional to see how your policy works . If you are renting a property in a coastal area , for example , there may be coverage limitations in your policy for damage caused by wind or hurricane .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Life Insurance Can You Borrow From ?
You may borrow from any policy that has cash value however your best bet is to purchase a policy from a company thatwelcomes it . Please read Bank on Yourself The size of a cash buildup differs substantially from company to company . In many instances there is no correlation between the size of the cash value and premiums paid ; in some cases there is an inverse relationship . Everything that the policyowner wishes to do with this policy while living is determined by the size of the cash value . For example , at some future time , a policyowner may wish to convert the cash value to a monthly retirement income . Its size will depend on -LRB- 1 -RRB- the amount of the cash value and -LRB- 2 -RRB- the attained age of the policy owner .
Well as there is a cash value accumulation to your Life Insurance policy . You may borrow as cash interests is compounded . Depending on your company rates are usually higher or lower than others . You may borrow from a Universal Life Policy , Whole Life Policy , Modified Endowment which is like a security policy that gains interest and is tax free . Its best to let the money accumulate and money borrowed from any life policy will be deducted from benefits to beneficiary if unpaid .
New York Life 's Whole Life Policies allow the owner to borrow against their policy after the first 2-3 years . It does not need to be repaid and may be kept tax free , although this would decrease the death benefit .
Are you concerned about borrowing against an existing life insurance policy that you own ? Or rather are you exploring all of the potential uses of a potential policy purchase ? Depending on your age , you may qualify for a life settlement . This is a transaction in which the policy owner sells their interest in the policy to an investor through a life settlement provider . The policy owner would receive multiples of the policy 's current cash value . However , a life settlement is a sale of the policy and just as if you sold your car , you no longer have an interest in the policy . In instances of cash crunches or reduced income causing a strain to pay premiums , you can always work with your agent to reduce the death benefit of the policy , work with a life settlement professional to sell your existing policy and use the proceeds to purchase paid up coverage or discuss the issue with your beneficiaries , who may have an interest in taking over the premiums in order to preserve the full death benefit . Feel free to contact me at WEBSITELINK if you would like to learn more about life settlements .
The only type of life insurance that you can borrow from is Universal Life or Whole Life . You can not borrow from Term Life . There are many types of Universal Life and Whole Life , and especially with Universal Life , some policies will have very little cash value . If you are purchasing a Universal Life policy for the purpose of borrowing from it , you will do best with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is a pretty difficult question to answer in a forum like this . I highly recommend that you speak to a professionalone-on-one to completely evaluate your needs and to see if you can borrow - and if so , if it would be financially smart to borrow from a retirement fund . Feel free to contact me if you have no one else . To give you a little idea if you could however , here are some guidelines : Most retirement funds are NOT AVAILABLE to borrow from . If you have a Defined Benefit or a Cash Balance Benefit , you can not borrow from it . You can move your funds to a different account , with professional guidance to avoid penalties . But with these types of accounts , you usually can not touch until you retire . If you have a Profit Sharing account or a 401K - you MAY be able to borrow depending upon the rules of the company that it is through and/or the rules of the company you work for . Again , however , most will not allow you to borrow . If they do , typically you can only borrow 50 % of YOUR contributions -LRB- not what your company contributes -RRB- or $ 10k , whichever is less . Again , this is a very difficult and technical topic to get a solid answer here . Look me up if I can be of any further help .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
If it 's a permanent life insurance policy that builds cash value , you can borrow from it . The amount that can be borrowed depends on how much cash value has accrued inside the policy . When you borrow money from a life insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the money is expected to be paid back and loan 's require interest to be paid on the loan . If the insured dies and there is an outstanding loan balance on it , the beneficiary would receive the death benefit less the loan amount and any interest due on the loan . It may be helpful to discuss it with your agent before borrowing from the policy to find out more about what will happen -LRB- e.g. what 's the interest rate that will be attached to the loan -RRB- when you borrow from the cash value .
If the whole life policy has a cash value you can borrow from the insurance company using your policy as collateral . the amount you can borrow can be as high as 90 % . Check with your life insurance broker to be sure . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it will trigger a taxable event . If / when you repay the loan you receive an adjustment you can use when you file your taxes . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , it does not trigger a taxable event . Check with you life insurance broker , to be advised of the consequents of borrowing . If you do borrow reminder to at least pay the interest on the loan to avoid compound and putting the policy ar risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 714 422 9616 . garylane@cox.net .
First of all , cash value life insurance is a bundled product and a bad investment . You should always separate your life insurance from any savings or investing that you are doing . Remember , life insurance is only there to protect your assets , pay off any remaining debt , and replace an income for your spouse . With this said , borrowing from a cash value policy means that you are borrowing from yourself and paying interest on the money that is saved in the policy . At the same time , your death benefit will decrease dollar for dollar by the money that you borrowed from your cash value . Now , you are paying the same premium for less insurance . Therefore , the benefits derived from borrowing from a life insurance policy will only be on the side of the insurance company .
You can borrow from your life insurance policy by contacting your insurance company and requesting a loan . You may need to complete a form and you usually can borrow up to 90 % of the cash value . The specifics will be detailed in your policy wording . In Canada , when you borrow you will trigger a taxable gain if the amount borrowed exceeds the adjusted cost base . Be sure to check with the company concerning any tax consequences involved with borrowing . When/if you repay the loan you will receive a credit for this . Using the policy as collateral and borrowing from a bank does not trigger a taxable gain . A reminder , if you do not pay the interest on the loan , it will compound and could put the policy at risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A Person With Lupus Get Life Insurance ?
There are two types of Lupus - systemic and non-systemic . Most insurance companies will decline systemic Lupus , but there are several that will accept people with non-systemic Lupus . Often , these plans may be graded , meaning you would n't get the full benefit immediately , but after a few years it would be full value . There are also guaranteed issue insurance plans that can provide some coverage . A licensed broker can help you find a plan that will be the best for your situation .
That is a great question . As the fine folks above me have said , your luck at finding a policy may depend upon your Lupus . I really think that finding an experienced independent agent can make the difference for you . An independent agent can shop several companies for you , and find a better fit . The problem for you will lie in the Guaranteed issue policies , if that is the route you end up having to take . Some can be pricey , and the trick is to find the shortest grade with the highest possible return for you during it . If you would like some more help , please contact me , and I 'll make some time to go over this privately with you . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Yes . I have done it . It takes some diligence and finesse . The key is finding an underwriter with a very high comfort level with this condition . The fact of the matter is that different insurance companies have preferences for underwriting different kinds of risks . The distributor I use must have a very strong connections with companies that like to underwrite lupus . Once I have this leverage , I have to make sure that all the quote data I collect is thorough and accurate . If the client is willing to work with me , and go through full disclosure , and cooperate with obtaining medical records , then we can put together a very strong case that you are not only eligible for coverage , but that underwriting guidelines could and should be applied aggressively .
Life insurance is based upon the law of large numbers . Hundreds of thousands of people have died with Lupus . From that experience companies can evaluate the effect that Lupus has on individuals . The medical information available to an underwriter will help them categorize the extent of the risk . The company actuary will have determined the statistical risk . In combination a premium can be developed for all but the most extreme risks .
An individual with systemic lupus -LRB- SLE -RRB- that has been in remission for an extended period of time can possibly get a table rated policy , depending on their full medical history . This would be a medically underwritten policy , and not graded -LRB- rather , it would pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for death by any reason except suicide in the first two years -RRB- . If a medically underwritten policy is unavailable , they can get simplified or guaranteed issue life insurance , which would probably be graded in the first few years of the policy . The less common types of lupus -LRB- discoid , drug-induced , and neonatal lupus -RRB- are generally less serious , and can have normal life insurance ratings .
Almost all people with lupus are able to get some type of life insurance policy . Mild , well controlled , systemic lupus alone should not keep you from getting any amount for which you are financially qualified . If you have had recent flare ups , are on steroids , or have complications from your lupus , you may need to take a nonmed policy . There are some no exam policies that do not ask about lupus , and that have reasonable rates . Contact a good impaired risk life insurance agent that carries lots of choices for those with health conditions , and you should be able to get affordable life insurance while having lupus .
Any true major medical insurance policy , group or individual , should cover treatment for Lupus as it is an autoimmune disease in the same class as arthritis . Perhaps a person who was issued an individual health insurance policy that was grandfathered under the terms of the health care reform law was issued coverage excluding Lupus as a condition of issuing the coverage but that 's about the only context I can think of where this question could arise . Certainly in the era of health care reform , especially after January 1 , 2014 , coverage for conditions such as Lupus should not be a big point of discussion . No policy issued after that date can have pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . That being said , how treatment for conditions such as Lupus are handled from a level of coverage perspective can and do vary from one insurance carrier to the next . First of all , your perception of coverage may be affected by the type of policy you have enrolled in . If you enrolled in a policy with a $ 6000 deductible then your perception might be that your condition is n't being covered when actually it is but you are n't seeing any benefits until you 've met your deductible . In other cases your insurance carrier may have treatment protocols in place that guide your physician on the methods of treatment and types of medications that must be adhered to for treatment of such a condition and these may be a departure from your past experience and usage . If you are covered under a non-compliant health plan , possibly a limited benefit or indemnity type plan , then it is quite likely you would have little or no coverage for Lupus or be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions and/or waiting periods . Short Term Medical policies , which by nature do not cover pre-existing conditions , are also another possible area where a person could find that Lupus would not be covered . But , in today 's environment , a person suffering from Lupus can get major medical coverage that covers their condition .
Yes , someone with lupus can get life insurance . While the most common , Systemic Lupus Erythematosus -LRB- SLE -RRB- is generally considered the most serious type of lupus . Mild systemic lupus that has been effectively controlled or in remission for several years can be rated Standard by some carriers . If there have been recent flare ups , the policy could be table rated or you may have to use a No Exam option . But there are options available . Other types of lupus than SLE will not have a significant impact on life insurance rates .
Yes , you can get life insurance with lupus , although the rates will vary a lot depending on the type of lupus you have , and severity of your symptoms . Systemic Lupus Erythematosus is the most common , yet the most serious , because it can affect internal organs . However , if SLE is very mild , it can qualify for rates as good as standard or low table ratings . Advanced lupus that is affecting bodily function will probably not be approved for a medically underwritten life insurance policy , but there are simplified and guaranteed issue policies that you may still be able to purchase .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have lupus ? Well , it depends upon some of the answers to these questions . The first is , I need to know the date it was first diagnosed . And then , what type of lupus was diagnosed ? Was it systemic ? Was it discoid lupus or drug induced SLE ? I 'll also need to know , is it in remission , or is it currently present ? Then I need to go through this checklist . Do I have low blood count , neurological disorders , protein issues , high blood pressure , lung involvement , heart involvement , renal insufficiency or failure altogether ? Is the insured taking any medications ? All these areas will give us an idea of how to price and get an offer from a specific carrier that is really benevolent in their underwriting when it comes to lupus .
The common rating I have found for persons with mild lupus is Standard . If lupus has been in remission for many years , the rating might be as good as Preferred . If there has been a recent flare up , if labs are abnormal or your lupus has a poor history of control , or if it has attacked some organs , there may be a need to use a simplified issue policy . Still , there is usually life insurance available for all types and severity of lupus .
An individual with systemic lupus -LRB- SLE -RRB- that has been in remission for an extended period of time can possibly get a table rated policy , depending on their full medical history . This would be a medically underwritten policy , and not graded -LRB- rather , it would pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for death by any reason except suicide in the first two years -RRB- . If a medically underwritten policy is unavailable , they can get simplified or guaranteed issue life insurance , which would probably be graded in the first few years of the policy . The less common types of lupus -LRB- discoid , drug-induced , and neonatal lupus -RRB- are generally less serious , and can have normal life insurance ratings .
If your lupus is mild and in remission , you can get a medically underwritten life insurance policy rated as good as Standard . The type of lupus , number of years you have had it , medications taken , and flare ups will all enter into the rating . If you have SLE -LRB- systemic lupus erythematosus -RRB- that has attacked organs , you may need to get a simplified or guaranteed issue policy .
There are two types of Lupus - systemic and non-systemic . Most insurance companies will decline systemic Lupus , but there are several that will accept people with non-systemic Lupus . Often , these plans may be graded , meaning you would n't get the full benefit immediately , but after a few years it would be full value . There are also guaranteed issue insurance plans that can provide some coverage . A licensed broker can help you find a plan that will be the best for your situation .
Yes , you can almost always get life insurance while having lupus . If your lupus is severe enough to cause kidney damage , anemia , pleurisy , pericarditis , or brain dysfunction , you will most likely need to take a simplified or guaranteed issue policy . If it is mild , you can get medically underwritten life insurance at reasonable rates .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
You can get health insurance if you have Lupus . Under the Affordable Care Act legislation , pre-existing conditions are covered under new Marketplace plans during Open Enrollment . Our job , as experienced health insurance brokers , is to find the plans that best meet customer needs , and compare the most affordable options . Treatment of Lupus is complex and it 's important to minimize your out of pocket expenses . Broker websites will provide you the lowest available rates and unbiased and accurate information . The . gov website has a history of glitches and security concerns .
Life insurance is based upon the law of large numbers . Hundreds of thousands of people have died with Lupus . From that experience companies can evaluate the effect that Lupus has on individuals . The medical information available to an underwriter will help them categorize the extent of the risk . The company actuary will have determined the statistical risk . In combination a premium can be developed for all but the most extreme risks .
You can get health insurance if you have Lupus . Thanks to the ACA legislation , during Open Enrollment , no medical questions are asked and most persons qualify for guarantee-issue plans . Also , a federal tax subsidy is available that could drastically reduce your rates . As an experienced health insurance broker with more than 33 years of experience , I handle situations and medical conditions such as this on a daily basis .
The rate that a company charges for a given age is determined by the mortality rate for that particular group . This group then is considered normal or standard . The underwriter is the person at the insurance company that determines if the particular risk , you , are standard . If your particular case is considered different than a standard risk , you might be offered rated insurance . This rating might be inconsequential , or it might be severe . In any case it uses available medical information and statistics to assign an appropriate rate . There are companies that will accept Lupus . You might have to contact a few to determine the best possible offer but by all means get into the process . Not having the insurance is a great deal more expensive .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Supplemental Life Insurance Work ?
Yes , supplemental life insurance works . Where it is different is in cost , underwriting and portability . First the easiest thing to comprehend about premium pricing is the more questions the cheaper the cost . Fewer questions asked ? the higher the premium . Cost usually on supplemental life is more expensive because they ask fewer questions -LRB- underwriting -RRB- of the insured . IF you are of reasonable good health , it usually better cost wise and policy wise to seek an individual policy where your good health is rewarded by a lower cost to you .
Video Transcript : What is supplemental life insurance ? Supplemental life insurance can be extra insurance that you have above and beyond either your group plan at work or individually-purchased life insurance . If you purchased this and you need more , some people look at supplemental life insurance to augment what they already have . You may want to look at this in 2 ways '' ` Would I like to have more coverage or would I like to have a supplemental retirement income plan , an extra cash value contract , that can generate withdrawals to basis and policy loans to gain tax-free , as long as I keep the policy in force for the life of the policy insured ? ' If I 'm looking at it as a supplemental income play or I 'm looking at it as a supplemental death benefit , supplemental life insurance can be a great adjunct to what I already have , either by group or by my individual purchase .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Medicare Supplement in Florida is affordable , but the specific rates depend on four factors : Where you live , your current age , male or female , and smoker or non-smoker . The rates are standardized , and the ability to change from one Medicare Supplement to another requires that you are approved through health underwriting . When you are turning 65 and looking for a Medicare Supplement , you have an open enrollment opportunity , with no health underwriting considerations at all . The most important thing to remember is that the plan that you picked when you turned 65 is not , necessarily , the plan you should stick with for the rest of your life . The rates go up with all companies and at different speeds . Your agent should be shopping the market for you at each and every anniversary of your policy . You should also pick an independent agent , as opposed to an agent that works for only one company . The difference in the premium offered by an agent that only works for AARP or Mutual of Omaha , vs. a broker that can bring any and all carriers , can be a difference of $ 100 per month or more . This is for the same , exact , standardized Medicare Supplement plan . All of the plans are the same - a Plan F with one carrier has the same benefits and providers that accept it , as the Plan F with the other companies . The only difference is the price . See your `` Medicare & You '' guidebook where it says this exact same thing . My agency has saved seniors over $ 1 million in premium since we 've been in business . Typically , the savings are $ 600 per year when we are shopping a plan from where they were with their old carrier . Again , demand that your agent shop these plans for you every year . Your doctor does not care what name is on the insurance card , or how much you paid in premiums . He or she is still going to give you great care . You should get the most insurance for the money , and with Medicare Supplement insurance in Florida , there is a great difference in the premiums for Medicare Supplement insurance .
Working with an independent insurance agent and one who specializes in Medicare Supplements is a great way to help you find the Medigap policy that meets your needs . Why ? Independent agents are not employees of the insurance company . We work for you and do not charge a fee for our service . We are always looking for companies that will benefit our clients . We know that one size does not fit all . Every individual is unique with their health qualifications , how much premium they can afford , andwhat benefits they desire . You benefit because an independent agent can shop the Medicare Supplement insurance market and show you what is available in your area . If you like to do everything on your own , keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . While contacting the insurance company directly may seem more convenient , you are often times paying a higher premium . I 've worked with many Seniors who initially bought a Medigap Plan directly with the insurance company . After realizing their Plan F , G , or N was the same exact Plan F , G , or N with another insurance company , they were happy to let me shop the market and find them a lower premium . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . 1-888-411-1329 .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
There are several factors to consider before making a decision for your senior Medicare needs : Foremost , will you be better off purchasing an insurance supplement , or is a Medicare Advantage plan better for you ? Those two solutions to solving your needs are different animals entirely , so make sure you educate yourself on the different advantages of each and look for only plans in your area . Some plans are county specific . Some supplements are area specific . This is one journey you do not want to take alone . So to help you make an informed decision with your agent , you of your power or attorney need to keep in mind the following items 1 . Are you eligible to change what you have ? 2 . What medications you take . 3 . How often do you go to the doctor ? 4 . How much risk are you willing to accept in return for lower premiums ? All insurance plans transfer some risk from the client to the insurance company . The less risk -LRB- deductibles and copay -RRB- on the client , the more premiums will be . Supplements that have the same letter name -LRB- PLan N , for example -RRB- theoretically cover the same items , so you should be shown what they do and do not cover , and be able to compare costs with other companies . 5 . Are you on assistance ? 6 . Are you under or over 65 ? When did you get part B ? 7 . What state and county do you live in ? 8 . Do you have extensive chronic illnesses ? 9 . Did you recently move , get married , get divorced , move in with family members ? 10 . What is the carriers financial rating and how long have they been in the Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage business ? These and other questions are ones I ask before making any recommendations to my clients . If you go to an independent broker who has many Medicare clients , he should have several choices to offer , as there are many companies that compete in this arena . It is n't an easy answer , hopefully the above questions will help you gather a checklist for your agent . If he or she does not ask many of these questions , or only has one solution , you might be better off to move on to a different agent
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Supplemental insurance can be a safety net for out-of-pocket expenses that major medical does n't cover . Major medical plans are designed to pay doctor and hospital bills , supplemental insurance is paid directly to the policyholder to cover everyday living expenses such as car payments , mortgages , and utility bills . For example : imagine a policyholderbreaks their leg . Major medical pays for the doctor and hospital bill , but this person is out of work for the next 6 weeks . Paying the everyday bills gets rough when someone is out of work , and this is where a supplemental policy comes into play . Benefits are paid directly to the policyholder regardless of any other insurance that the policyholder may have , to be used in whatever way they see fit .
Medigap insurance is the same thing a a Medicare supplement . This form of insurance is designed to `` supplement the gaps '' in coverage of original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- . `` Supplemental '' insurance is a term used however for any insurance that supplements , i.e. completes or enhances , some other insurance coverage . For example , a hospital indemnity or short term care insurance policy is also `` supplemental '' to Medicare insurance , however not the same as Medigap . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent experienced in Medicare and supplemental health plans to assess your needs and objectives and provide optimal solutions for you in this area .
That will depend on your needs . Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage exist to fill the gaps in Medicare coverage . Medicare does not cover everything and the holes where it does n't can be very expensive to the insured . So for greater coverage you can review Medicare Supplements and Advantage plans and see which one would best suit your needs . There are several choices in levels of coverage to choose from . Perhaps the most basic difference between Medicare supplements and Advantage plans is choice of where to go . With a Medicare Supplement , the insured can choose whom to see , change their minds , see somebody else and not be hampered . Advantage plans pretty much will lock the insured in with a medical group until the next open enrollment period . The insured must go through that group for care . The coverage is based on using their care system . Emergencies would be the only exception .
Can supplemental insurance be used along with medicare ? That 's what supplemental insurance was made for . Medicare covers many things , but not everything and not every cost a person may face . A medicare supplement steps in and fills the gaps to make Medicare a more complete policy . How complete depends on which plan you choose from the Medicare supplements authorized by your state . One thing to keep in mind as things change in our healthcare world is that many practices are n't accepting new patients with just Medicare , so a supplement is something to consider if you decide to go that route .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
A supplemental disability insurance is a personally owned long term disability policy usually purchased to supplement a group employer sponsored long term disability plan . You are basically `` supplementing '' your existing group plan with a personally owned policy . The reason this is necessary is because most group plans only cover 50 - 60 % of an employees income . A supplemental policy will provide additional coverage in addition to the group plan . The amount of supplemental disability coverage you can purchase is limited based on the insurance carriers guidelines . This is determined by the amount of your income your group plan covers and weather or not you pay for your group plan or your company does . As a general rule , most carriers wo n't let you insure more than 70 % of your gross annual income .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan . If you have any questions about your coverage or would like to review options for a Medicare supplement plan , please send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or call me at 703-665-9133 .
end question
start question
annuities
How Liquid Are Annuities ?
Traditional annuities are very liquid . They can be surrendered immediately with proceeds reaching you in a few working days . They may have surrender charges depending upon the contract and the length of time it has been in force , so the full value of the annuity might not be available to you .
Non qualified tax deferred annuities have surrender charges . In the early years , surrender charges can be expensive . Many annuities allow for a 10 % free withdrawal , but the gain is subject to ordinary income tax . Market adjustment annuities that can change the interest rate credited to the policy if it 's surrendered before the contract period , which to some is a liquidity issue .
To expand on what Steve said already . There are a few other liquidity options with Fixed Annuities . Some -LRB- but not many -RRB- allow for 15 % Surrender Charge free withdrawals . Also , most Deferred Fixed Annuities waive the Surrender Charges if you have a Long Term Care need , or if you are terminally ill . Like all withdrawals from Annuities , this would be subject to capital gains tax . Or if it is in an IRA it would be subject to Income Taxes .
The main disadvantage of Annuities is that your money is not 100 % liquid until your term is over . Some annuities have more liquidity than others ; most offer 10 % yearly penalty free liquidity . Some offer up to 20 % yearly liquidity , while some just offer 5 % . Most deferred annuities allow complete liquidity in the event of a terminal illness or a Long Term Care need . This is why it is important to work with an experienced independent agent who can evaluate your needs and help you find the right product for your situation . Another commonly cited disadvantage are `` high fees '' . But in fact , only Variable Annuities automatically include fees . But the fees do tend to be high in most peoples opinion . It is important to remember that a `` disadvantage '' all depends on perspective and what your needs are .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
That is a great question ! An annuity by its very nature is not a liquid asset . To be liquid , it must be readily accessible , and easily converted . Cash , bonds , or stocks are liquid assets . Your annuity contract will state a specific number of years that you can not touch the funds without incurring fees and charges . While you may be able to withdraw some funds without fees from the annuity , to do so affects the long term returns , and can have a big impact on the profitability of your investment in the annuity . If you would like help , please contact your agent , or drop me a line . Thanks for asking !
Permanent life insurance policies can accumulate cash values for liquidity purposes . Depending on the type of policy and when youre attempting to liquidate cash values , will determine if you have liquidity . Liquidity is in the eye of the beholder . How much liquidity is necessary , only the policy owner can define ? That being said , be advised , that non modified endowment contract policy loans may have a price tag . Policy loans provisions can charge from zero to 400 basis points depending upon what life insurance policy you own . But you need to be careful about taking withdrawals of basis in the first 15 years of a policy that has gain in the policy . Certain policies are subject to the force out rule and can actually expose the policy owner to a taxable event . The first step is to order an in force ledger to determine the total cash value less surrender charges and policy expenses . Then then have the life insurance company predetermine if access to cash values can be achieved without a taxable event . Keep in mind that the contract must be kept in force for the life of the insured -LRB- not the policy owner -RRB- or a taxable event could occur .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Annuities can have disadvantages based on the product profile and the client suitability . Annuities are generally purchased for future income . During the accumulation period , liquidity could be a concern based on limited withdrawals , surrender charges and could incur a penalty before age 59 . Long term guaranteed fixed interest rates , especially in a low interest rate environment , could be detrimental in a rising interest rate market where annuities could be difficult to move because of the liquidity items already mentioned . Some annuities are tied to domestic and foreign indices , with a possibility of non crediting years because of poor indices performance . Some annuities use separate sub accounts which use market equities and bond investment vehicles that have exposure to volatility , i.e. you could lose all your money in the cash value account .
Some advisers use invest for securities and save for non-securities . You can invest or save from your cash flow on a monthly basis or pay a lump sum deposit into an annuity . For investors : variable annuities , a security , are a mid to long term investment when utilizing market equities and bonds via the separate sub accounts . Know your liquidity needs before investing and risk tolerance profile because you can lose money with variable annuities . For savers : fixed interest rate or indexed annuities , both non-securities , are short to midterm savings options . Know your liquidity needs before making a product purchase .
How much short term disability do you need ? Well , it 's going to depend on what you have on hand that is liquid and if you want to liquidate those assets . People buy insurance because they either do n't have the reserves or do n't want to sell reserves to meet an unexpected illness or injury . How much you need depends on how you would handle the situation ? All insurance , no insurance , a little of both ? The answer is your situation .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
A mutual fund is very liquid , you can usually cash out with a phone call . Now if you mean by liquidity what is the cost to do so , that is different . A front loaded mutual fund has no redemption costs normally as you have already paid the costs up front . Those costs are not returnable . A rear loaded mutual fund puts 100 % of you funds into the investment , but if you redeem early -LRB- as in 5-10 years depending on the fund -RRB- you will pay some sort of cost to redeem . The exception to this would be the money market mutual fund as many of that type of mutual fund actually offer the ability to write checks from the account . Basically if you are worried about how liquid a mutual fund is , you should probably not be there . As with most investments , the plan should be long term . There are other places to place short term money .
That is a great question ! A really great question , and if there were just one great answer , everyone would be doing it , and there would be no seniors living in poverty -LRB- 55 % of all Seniors live at or below poverty level , according to the 2012 Census -RRB- . To give you an answer that would work for you , I 'd need to know what assets you have , where they are located , how liquid they are , what your risk tolerance is , what your retirement goals are , how your insurance protection is , your health and your spouses health status , and more . To give you a generic answer ? Somewhere where the bulk is protected yet fairly liquid , with the opportunity to draw a steady income from in the best tax advantaged way . If you would like to contact me with more specifics , I 'd be happy to give you some better advice . Thanks for asking !
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities are personal assets than can be liquidated by the owner of the policy . But there may be ramifications in doing so . These products have surrender charges and sometimes , as in MVAs , an interest rate reduction for terminating before the contract period is over . Liquidation will trigger an ordinary income tax event on all gain in the policy and a 10 % additional penalty for cashing in the annuity before 59 1/2 .
How much disability insurance do you need ? Well , the answer will vary depending on the individual and what they have asset and investment wise and how willing they are to liquidate those assets . As far as how much or how long or how soon is a function of looking at your situation and finding something that works for you .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Annuities are tax deferred products . If youre in a low tax bracket annuities may not make sense for you . Annuities can have stiff surrender charges . If you need liquidity annuities may not be good for you . And along those same lines , if you need your money before 59 annuities may not be an option for you . You should not buy annuities until you establish a cash account for financial emergencies .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Cancel A Auto Insurance Claim ?
You do n't really cancel an auto insurance claim . However , you can withdraw the claim . If an investigation has begun , it is possible that it will be completed to its conclusion . If there was damage to other property or persons , your insurer will pay any obligation that it is legally bound to pay , even if you request the claim be stopped .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
Any time that fraud is detected the insurance company can cancel an auto policy . If you stage an accident in order to file a claim , the company will probably cancel your policy . If new information comes to light that would change the nature of your application , that could lead to a cancellation . If you are arrested for transporting moonshine in your car , your auto insurance company will likely cancel your policy as soon as they find out . If you fail to pay the premium your policy can be cancelled .
Certainly , but you do not want this situation as most policies contain a ` other insurance ' clause in them and this could create problems you do not need in the event of a loss/claim occurringin the ` overlap ' period . Follow the cancellation procedures outlined in the policy you desire to cancel and have no gap between the cancelled policy and the replacement policy . DO NOT RELY ON A NEW BROKER OR AGENT TO CANCEL YOUR EXISTING POLICY WITHOUT GETTING DOCUMENTATION IN WRITING THEY ARE SENDING APPROPRIATE CANCELLATION DOCUMENTS AND EVIDENCE TO YOUR CURRENT CARRIER . Remember , the contract is between you and your current carrier and only you -LRB- the named insured -RRB- can request cancellation of your policy . Also be aware that ` auto pay ' or ` EFT ' payment modes on an existing policy may not be terminated immediately and your account may be ` swept ' for a premium due within the next 21 to 30 days . Make sure your auto pay or EFT plan is terminated asap -LRB- and get evidence -RRB- when your policy is cancelled .
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
The policy documents should have a ` cancellation ' section - usually found in the Policy Conditions . This will give instructions for cancellation . You should be able to mail the originalpolicy with a written request for cancellation -LRB- subsequent to the date of mailing -RRB- and evidence you have either replaced coverage or the plates were surrendered and coverage is no longer required for the registration . Regulations vary state to state and if the state you have the registration in has ` compulsory ' insurance , you will have to obtain the evidence mentioned . Remember , if you surrender plates one day , have the coverage cancelled the next day - auto insurance usually cancels 12:01 am on the day the cancellation is requested . A competent agent or broker should be able to guide you . You c an always contact your carrier for info .
An auto insurance policy can be cancelled at any time by you , or may be cancelled for non-payment by your insurance company . Your current provider will probably require proof of new insurance at the time of cancellation , as well as a signed request to cancel the policy if you are requesting the cancellation .
Your auto insurance is typically an at will coverage , which means that you could cancel the coverage at any point you wish . If you have a loan on the vehicle and you have cancelled your auto insurance you may be in violation of the contractual agreement with the lien holder and they may purchase auto insurance coverage for you and then charge you for this coverage as stipulated in the contract . Almost all states in the USA require all licensed drivers to have auto insurance and if you are caught driving without it you could be fined . Not to mention that if you are driving without insurance and are involved in an accident you could be placing yourself and your family in great financial peril .
Yes . You can cancel your car insurance at any time . The question that you may want to know before cancelling is whether your insurance company pro-rates or short-rates your cancellation . A pro-rated cancellation is more favorable for you since you are charged only for the days that have been used . In Illinois , the insurance companies by law have to pro-rate an auto cancellation .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
A homowners policy can be cancelled prior to the completion of the policy term . All coverage ends on the date of cancellation . The company will cancel a policy if the scheduled premium isnt received . It will cancel if you have by fraud , misrepresentation or by omission of fact caused the company to issue a policy that they would not otherwise have issued . They will cancel the policy if there has been a material change in the property that would increase the likelihood of claim . The company is required by law to allow a certain period of time before cancelling the policy . Unused premium is returned according to policy provisions .
Any company can cancel your auto or home insurance . Auto and Home insurance is not guaranteed renewal . If your claims history does not meet guidelines , if your home is in disrepair , if you purchase a dog that is considered dangerous , if the company decides to pull out of your state , there are a number of reasons a company can cancel you .
If your auto insurance cancels , when you look to secure coverage with another carrier the amount of time from the cancellation of coverage to the time that you secure coverage with another carrier be seen as a lapse of coverage possibly forcing you into a high risk policy . If you secure coverage with another carrier before the cancellation or within thirty days of the cancellation then you would not be considered as having a lapse in coverage .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
While of the `` unearned '' premium should be returned when you cancel your car insurance , it would be important to know why you are cancelling your car insurance.If there are no other cars in your household and you are not considered an insured on another comparable auto insurance policy , you may wish to consider `` Non-owned Auto '' coverage . This type of policy covers you for liability and physical damage while you are operating a car you do not own -LRB- borrowed , rented , etc. -RRB- and may provide uninsured/underinsured coverage to you when you are a pedestrian or riding in someone else 's vehicle . Not owning a car does not mean you no longer have an auto related exposure .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
Yes an insurance company can non-renew your homeowners insurance policy for several reasons . Main reasons are change in risk . This could be due to claims or hazards on your home that have increased and as a homeowner you fail to mitigate . In other words if the insurance carrier can no longer tolerate you as a risk the insurance carrier can chose non renew . Keep in mind all polices are self terminating at the end of a term and the insurance company can chose at that time to either offer a renewal or chose to not renew . This is not an actual cancellation . Cancellations are actually much more difficult . The only way a cancellation occurs is if you the insured fail to make a payment or often on a newly written policy a hazard was not dealt with or there was mis-representation on the application . These types of cancellations however fall on the insured and not the insurance provider .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Medigap Select ?
Each Medigap plan can be offered as a `` select '' plan . The premiums for these plans are generally less than those of the traditional Medigap plans , however , they require you use in-network doctors and hospitals -LRB- much like how an HMO works -RRB- to receive full benefits -LRB- except in the case of an emergency -RRB- . If you use a provider outside of the network , you may be responsible for the co-insurance that is not covered under Original Medicare as long as you use a doctor/hospital that accepts Medicare , If you buy a select Medigap plan and decide you would rather have a standard Medigap plan , you can change it to the standard plan within 12 months of when you started the coverage . A common question with select plans is `` if I move , can I take my coverage with me ? . Under select Medigap plans , you would have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a new Medigap plan which plans are available depends on your zip code as not every plan is available in a given location . If applying for a new Medigap plan via a guaranteed-issue right , you can apply as early as 60 calendar days and up to 63 days after your coverage ended to buy a plan . Under a standard plan , you can take the plan with you as they are guaranteed renewable and have no networks . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
Each Medigap plan can be offered as a `` select '' plan . The premiums for these plans are generally less than those of the traditional Medigap plans , however , they require you use in-network doctors and hospitals -LRB- much like how an HMO works -RRB- to receive full benefits -LRB- except in the case of an emergency -RRB- . If you use a provider outside of the network , you may be responsible for the co-insurance that is not covered under Original Medicare as long as you use a doctor/hospital that accepts Medicare , If you buy a select Medigap plan and decide you would rather have a standard Medigap plan , you can change it to the standard plan within 12 months of when you started the coverage . A common question with select plans is `` if I move , can I take my coverage with me ? . Under select Medigap plans , you would have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a new Medigap plan which plans are available depends on your zip code as not every plan is available in a given location . If applying for a new Medigap plan via a guaranteed-issue right , you can apply as early as 60 calendar days and up to 63 days after your coverage ended to buy a plan . Under a standard plan , you can take the plan with you as they are guaranteed renewable and have no networks . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap Plan purchased through AARP means you will have Medicare Supplement insurance through United Healthcare . Medigap Plans A , B , C , F , K , L and N are sold by AARP . In some states , AARP has Medigap SELECT plans . For example , if you have Medigap SELECT Plan F or C , you get all the benefits of those plans -- except you have to use the hospitals in the network directory to receive full hospital care benefits . Applicants must be AARP members or live in the same household and share the same AARP membership number . It 's important to note that Medigap Plan benefits are standardized ; so , Plan F with AARP is the same Plan F with another insurance company . The difference is the price . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can help you compare an AARP premium to other insurance companies . Many people like to do their own research and sometimes will end up with an insurance company such as AARP because it 's easy to call up and enroll . However , this ` easy ' process can often times equate to a higher premium . By working with an independent agent , you can compare an AARP premium to other insurance company premiums for the same Medigap Plan you desire . This will make sure you are getting the best priced Medigap Plan . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
These two plans are nearly identical as there is only 1 difference between the benefits - coverage of the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Plan F is the most comprehensive plan as it covers all available Medigap benefits at 100 % from day 1 including the Part B deductible - Plan G does not cover the deductible and must be paid out-of-pocket . When comparing the two plans , you want to look at the price differential at the carrier -LRB- s -RRB- offering them at the lowest cost . If the difference in annualized premiums between plan F and plan G is more than $ 147 , than plan G will be the plan you should select - if it 's less than $ 147 , then you should select plan F. Please note , Medigap plans are standardized meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of which insurance company you buy your Medigap plan from . Every carrier has to pay the benefits the same way . If it 's your first time buying a Medigap plan or you already have one and want to lower your monthly premium , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance broker who can shop the case for you among many companies to ensure you 're paying the lowest possible price for your plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medigap plan and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Many insurance companies offer Medigap policies including Aetna , UnitedHealthcare , Blue Cross and Humana . Depending on your state , there will be dozens of carriers that offer affordable options . Perhaps the most difficult choice , however , is not necessarily choosing the company , but actually selecting the specific Medigap plan that is best to purchase . An experienced licensed broker and their website can help you find and compare the best options and select the policy that is most suitable for you . With more than 32 years of experience in the business , I have found that picking the best Medigap plan is one of the biggest financial challenges for consumers that have retired , or are nearing retirement .
What is Medigap vs Medicare Advantage ? Well in simplest terms , Medigap plans allow you to fire your doctor and go where you want within your area and Medicare Advantage plans require you to stay with one primary doctor for the year . If you get upset or want to make your own choices a Medigap plan might be a better selection for you . Medigap plans usually fill in what part A and B do n't cover . Usually you need to purchase part D along with if you want RX coverage . A Medicare Advantage plan works in a similar way , even offering more benefits in many cases , but does require you to work through the plan 's system .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N -RRB- . Plans E , H , I and J are no longer available to purchase . In some states , you may be able to buy a Medigap SELECT policy or a High-Deductible Plan F . The SELECT plans requires you to use specific hospitals . The deductible for High-Deductible Plan F is $ 2,140 in 2014 . Plans F , G , and N are widely sold by most Medicare Supplement insurance companies . They are popular with Medicare beneficiaries for various reasons . Plan F covers all Medicare approved charges . You are not responsible for paying any deductibles , co-pays or excess charges . Plan G is covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You have all the same benefits of Plan F after meeting the small deductible . Plan N covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 . You also have co-pays that are never more than $ 20 to any doctor/specialist who accepts Medicare . If you have more questions about Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 .
Medigap plans are fairly straighforward as they have standardized benefits -LRB- e.g. meaning a medigap plan F from company ABC is the same exact plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . You can see the chart illustration of benefits in the Medigap guidebook on page 11 -LRB- free copies are available on the Medicare.gov website - I can e-mail a copy to you upon request as well -RRB- . Some of the big advantages of Medigap plans are that there are no networks -LRB- you can go to any doctor or hospital that accepts Medicare -RRB- and the policy is guaranteed renewable . Most people buying a Medigap plan will purchase a plan F or plan G as they create the most predictable healthcare expense structures . Plan F offers the most comprehensive coverage - it covers all Medigap benefits at 100 % from day 1 . The advantage of this plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- for the most part , you 're writing a check for your premium and you 're done - you wo n't get hit with big bills for any Medicare-approved charge -RRB- . Plan G is the second most comprehensive plan available - it 's identical to plan F except you would be responsible for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The advantage of a plan G is that in many areas the savings in premium per year are greater than the cost of the deductible . For example , if the difference in premium is $ 30 per month - you 're saving $ 360 per year by taking on a risk of $ 147 . The big factor to look at when comparing companies is the price of the plan you select . Remember - a plan F from one company is the same exact plan F from another -LRB- in short , why pay extra for the same coverage -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans are fairly straighforward as they have standardized benefits -LRB- e.g. meaning a medigap plan F from company ABC is the same exact plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . You can see the chart illustration of benefits in the Medigap guidebook on page 11 -LRB- free copies are available on the Medicare.gov website - I can e-mail a copy to you upon request as well -RRB- . Some of the big advantages of Medigap plans are that there are no networks -LRB- you can go to any doctor or hospital that accepts Medicare -RRB- and the policy is guaranteed renewable.Most people buying a Medigap plan will purchase a plan F or plan G as they create the most predictable healthcare expense structures . Plan F offers the most comprehensive coverage - it covers all Medigap benefits at 100 % from day 1 . The advantage of this plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- for the most part , you 're writing a check for your premium and you 're done - you wo n't get hit with big bills for any Medicare-approved charge -RRB- . Plan G is the second most comprehensive plan available - it 's identical to plan F except you would be responsible for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The advantage of a plan G is that in many areas the savings in premium per year are greater than the cost of the deductible . For example , if the difference in premium is $ 30 per month - you 're saving $ 360 per year by taking on a risk of $ 147 . The big factor to look at when comparing companies is the price of the plan you select . Remember - a plan F from one company is the same exact plan F from another -LRB- in short , why pay extra for the same coverage -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap Insurance , also called `` Medicare Supplement '' Insurance works with original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- to provide coverage for the `` gaps '' - the coinsurance and deductibles required to be paid by the Medicare beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- under original Medicare . Although Medicare represents excellent insurance coverage , these `` gaps '' can be expensive for the consumer . For example , the Part A -LRB- hospitalization -RRB- deductible for 2015 is $ 1,260 , and the Part B -LRB- doctors costs , etc. -RRB- is $ 147 plus 20 % coinsurance . A Medigap policy insures these potentially large `` gaps '' with the payment of a known monthly premium . Medigap Insurance is optional for the consumer - there is no `` requirement '' to purchase it , although it is a good idea to get some Medigap coverage if staying with original Medicare . Alternatively , Medicare beneficiaries may select a Medicare Advantage Plan . Although there are costs and limitations in Medicare Advantage Plans , a beneficiary does not need , nor can they purchase Medigap Insurance under a Medicare Advantage Plan .
Medigap policies serve as a supplement to Original Medicare . Original medicare is an 80/20 plan , where Medicare pays 80 % of the approved charges . The beneficiary is typically responsible for the 20 % co-insurance as well as co-pays and deductibles that come with Medicare Parts A & B . The Medigap policy is designed to pick up the 20 % Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium payable to the carrier selected . The most comprehensive Medigap policy is Plan F , which covers all of the Part A & B deductible , co-insurance and co-pays , so when the beneficiary goes to receive care their is zero out-of-pocket costs . Some plans may also provide benefits like foreign travel as well as a gym membership as part of your regular plan . Please note : when purchasing a Medigap Policy , you need to add a Stand-Alone Prescription Drug Plan to satisfy your requirement as a Medicare Beneficiary to have Part D - Prescription Drug Coverage met .
The big reason to buy a Medigap plan is Medicare Part A & B does not cover everything by itself . The bigger reason is the 20 % that is n't covered has no limit ! I am not sure why anyone would want to leave themselves exposed to a limitless risk . Medicare along with the right Medigap plan is great health insurance . The ability to see any doctor you want and to be able to control your out of pocket expenses for healthcare is important . Once you have a Medigap plan your benefits ca n't change as long as you have that plan . Speak to an independent agent that specializes in Medigap plans and you will save a lot of time and money selecting the plan that meets your needs .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best Medigap policy is the one that fits your needs and budget . For some it might be plan F. Most select Medicare supplement plan F because that is the only one that is presented to them . Plan F pays 100 % of approved Medicare Part A and Part B expenses . What is better than that ? One that delivers more value is better . That is why over 90 % of my clients do NOT buy Medigap plan F .
There are many insurance companies that offer Medigap or Medicare Supplement policies -LRB- the two are the same -RRB- . It will depend on the state in which you live as far as what companies are approved to sell the plans.AARP United Healthcare offer plans in nearly every State . Mutual of Omaha , Standard Life , Humana , Anthem Blue Cross , and many others . Talk with a local agent who specializes in Medigap insurance to select a plan competitive in your area .
Plan F is the most popular Medigap plan . Before buying one , you first want to research the types of benefits available under a Medigap plan , decide which of these benefits you want , and then select the Medigap policy that meets these needs . All of the Medigap plans are standardized so the benefits under a given plan is the EXACT same from every carrier . So how do they differentiate themselves in that type of marketplace ? They feature different rates , rating methods - community rated , issue age rated , and attained age rated , and value added services -LRB- e.g. UHC plan members can get discounts for vision or dental services and access to the senior sneakers program through AARP -RRB- . A lot of people think `` Why do n't I just get a plan F ? All of the benefits available are included in that plan ! '' While this is true , this plan is also going to be the most expensive . If you 're on a fixed income , you may want to try to keep your cost down . Therefore , a different plan may be more appropriate for you . For example , a plan G offers all of the same benefits as a plan F , except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 for 2014 -RRB- . However , a plan G is going to be cheaper than a plan F -LRB- and usually by a good margin -RRB- . Plan N can also reduce premiums by a substantial margin and offer great coverage as well - the difference from plans F & G being a small copay is due when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to a $ 20 copay -RRB- or the hospital -LRB- up to a $ 50 copay -RRB- and excess charges are not covered . Plan N is most useful for someone who 's doctors accept Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- when accepting assignment , a doctor accepts the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full and can not bill you an excess charge -RRB- . Another major point to keep in mind is where your health is now and where it may be in the future because you might not be able to switch to another Medigap plan later if your health drastically changed down the line , you may not be able to qualify for a new plan if medical underwriting is required . The rating method a carrier uses is an important factor to consider here . You also need to find out which carriers offer the plan in your area . Remember to keep in mind that not every carrier offers every plan . As there are many health care plan options available to seniors , it 's most helpful for you to work with an experienced broker who can guide you through all of these steps . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Wells Fargo Have Renters Insurance ?
Wells Fargo is not an insurance company . Wells Fargo can act as an agent with several insurance companies to find you renters insurance . I personally would consult an independent agent who offers insurance for a living and is able to consult on coverage needs then use a bank that offers insurance as a side business .
Well Fargo 's advisors sell annuities as agents . Well Fargo does not itself manufacture annuity products . So when you purchase an annuity through Well Fargo , Wells Fargo or their advisory group is acting as an agent just as any agent would when they sell you an annuity , and Well Fargo receives the commissions that would be paid to an agent .
Wells Fargo -LRB- the bank -RRB- does not offer/underwrite life insurance as they are a bank . They do , however , have an agreement with at least one life insurance company that underwrites policies that are solicited through Wells Fargo . Meaning , Wells Fargo makes money by passing on information of their new mortgagees to insurance companies and agencies as an extra revenue source . It also broadens their product offering . If you google `` wells fargo term life insurance '' and you read the fine print it will say the name of a life insurance company in there .
Wells Fargo is not an insurance company . Wells Fargo can act as an agent with several insurance companies to find you renters insurance . I personally would consult an independent agent who offers insurance for a living and is able to consult on coverage needs then use a bank that offers insurance as a side business .
Wells Fargo is not an insurance company and does not offer Homeowners Insurance . However , Wells Fargo may have licensed agents working in the bank who may be able to offer homeowners insurance through other insurance carriers Wells Fargo was able to obtain appointments with . In other words Wells Fargo acts as the agent . The question is will the agent be around for the long term .
Some investment brokers from firms like Wells Fargo happen to have a life insurance license so they can offer variable annuities to their clients but they tend to not use it for life insurance . While a few may actively sell life insurance most do not . Access to insurance companies and products may be limited at these firms . Insurance is a complex financial product requiring a planning expertise that most investment brokers do not have . If you need insurance advice I suggest that you seek out the services of a life insurance professional .
Wells Fargo advertises mortgage insurance or private mortgage insurance , through a third party life insurance company . Mortgage insurance is generally required when the down payment is insufficient for the banking institution to protect their perceived market exposure and is usually paid through the escrow account that manages the mortgage payment .
Wells Fargo bank refers their business in annuities to many Life Insurance companies . So you are not directly purchasing an annuity insurance contract from them directly . Just like their insurance companies on auto it is brokered threw one of their companies they have established with . But they do have an advantage they have more than one choice
Wells Fargo offers auto insurance and their rates are sometimes competitive , depending upon where you live . You can compare policies with them over the phone and they can tell you what they can save in premiums , or , in many areas , how much higher they are . They also insure motorcycles and boats . Your broker may represent them .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance is about the same rate with all carriers . The average renters policy in Montana is bout $ 100 a year with $ 30,000 worth of contents and $ 100,000 in Liability limits with $ 5,000 in medical pay and a $ 500.00 deductible . Most carriers are between $ 10 to $ 15 a month . The only advantage in choosing some carriers is that if you already have an auto policy with the same carrier then it can lower your auto insurance . Example I have a client that has a carrier in our agency for her auto but they carrier does n't let agents sell the renters policy you can only get it online . But what she did was get the renters policy online for $ 100 a year but it lowered her car insurance $ 80 every 6 months hence it was almost like getting paid to have the renters insurance . I would talk to your local agent and see if they have any package deals since renters policies are so inexpensive but well worth the investment .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance is usually associated with the owner of the dwelling ; whereas Renters Insurance is specifically intended for the non-owner occupant of the dwelling . Renters Insurance is intended to provide Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Coverage for the tenant of a home . In a tenant occupied situation , the owner of the dwelling will usually carry Landlords Protection Coverage for the dwelling which does not offer any protection to the tenant . The tenant should purchase his/her own Renters Insurance . This is coverage is very inexpensive and is well worth it ; there have been many instances where a property owner has brought legal action against a tenant for negligence leading to a fire or other type of claim ; the Renters Insurance provides Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant which may provide defense in such an occurrence . For a renters quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you should find a licensed representative in your State for a quote .
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Should I Pay For Disability Insurance ?
If you do not receive Disability Insurance for free through your place of employment , you should most likely pay for Disability Insurance . If your paycheck is essential to maintaining your standard of living , and if you can afford to pay the Disability Insurance premiums , it is definitely a worthy expense .
If your ability to earn a living is important , then you should obtain disability insurance . Many employers provide `` short term '' disability insurance . taxable benefits lasting up to 6 months or a year . Long term disability policies provided by employers are generally hard to collect on , especially for a long term disability . The best individual policies provide the following benefits : 1 . The insurer ca n't increase premiums before age 65 2 . The insurer ca n't decrease benefits 3 . You will be paid if you ca n't do your regular occupation , whether the disability is caused by illness -LRB- 92 % are ! -RRB- or injury , on the job or off 4 . You will receive benefits if you ca n't work full time , or you ca n't do all the facets of your regular job , and suffer an income loss
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Certainly long term disability insurance is risk management tool that every responsible person needs to seriously consider . The average working age American has about a 25 % chance of being disabled for some portion of their life . So , 75 % of us avoid disability if you look on the bright side but a 1 out of 4 chance that you 'll be the unlucky person is pretty sobering . Your chances of being disabled for some period are far higher than your odds of winning the Powerball Lottery . And , if you do experience a disability close to 40 % of those unlucky persons experience a disability period in excess of 5 years with the average disability lasting 82 months from recent figures I saw . The challenge , as with so many things in life , is effectively managing all the risks that life presents us with . Health care , dental care , vision care , the risk of death , oh and somewhere in there you 've got to eat and have shelter and live a life . I ca n't say that long term disability insurance should be your number one priority over eating but it 's certainly more important than having a set of spinners on your car or having the ultimate man cave . Disability insurance should be high on your list of risks to manage and the younger in life you make the commitment the more economical it will be .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the MOST favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the worst definition as you must meet more requirements than a true own occupation or modified own occupation to receive a benefit payout . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately with a true own occupation or modified own occupation policy or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own . This is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There 's many companies that offer disability insurance such as Guardian , MetLife , Assurity , Standard , Principal , just to name a few . The DEFINITION OF DISABILITY is the single most important factor when determining which disability insurance policy to apply for . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
You should get Disability Insurance so that you can receive income if you were to become disabled . Short Term Disability pays income to the insured person when they suffer disabilities that last from a few weeks to a couple of years . Long Term Disability pays income to the insured person when disabled by conditions that last from a few months to permanent disability .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
end question
start question
annuities
Does Metlife Offer Annuities ?
MetLife does offer fixed and variable annuities . Annuities are offered by hundreds of insurance companies and come in many types , offering different benefits to suit a wide variety of situations . It is always a good idea to work with a knowledgeable , independent insurance professional to see which annuity will best fit your individual needs .
MetLife is rated A + by AM Best , which is the second highest rating offered by AM Best . MetLife has the most life insurance policy in force in North America . To get a quote for MetLife life insurance , you can go to a quote engine that offers that product , and compare MetLife 's rates to other insurance companies that are rated A + .
No , Metlife does not offer health insurance . The Metlife.com website does have a helpful page explaining what health insurance is , and tips on how to pick a good health insurance plan . The main insurance plans that Metlife offers are life insurance , disability insurance , home insurance , and auto insurance .
MetLife Long Term Care Insurance would be a policy that was sold by MetLife prior to 2010 . Since then , MetLife no longer offers the purchase of new long term care insurance policies through their company . The `` old '' MetLife long term care insurance could be a group policy or an individual long term care policy .
MetLife does offer fixed and variable annuities . Annuities are offered by hundreds of insurance companies and come in many types , offering different benefits to suit a wide variety of situations . It is always a good idea to work with a knowledgeable , independent insurance professional to see which annuity will best fit your individual needs .
Many insurance companies offer annuities such as Guardian , MetLife Prudential , ING , Nationwide , Genworth , and Lincoln National , just to name a few . If you 're looking to purchase an annuity , I would advise consulting with an independent annuity broker who can review options from multiple companies to find you the annuity that will maximize your return . The type of annuity is a major factor as there are a number of different kinds such as fixed annuities , equity linked index annuities , etc. . Please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Unfortunately , MetLife discontinued offering Long Term Care Insurance in 2010 . Since then , they continue to service the individual and group long term care policies that they had sold previously , but have not yet started offering a new long term care insurance product . MetLife continues to offer a large line of other insurance products .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
Travelers is often used to describe Travelers Indemnity Company . That company does not offer life insurance . However , Travelers Life and Annuity is a company that used to sell Life Insurance , and was acquired by the MetLife Life and Annuity Company of Connecticut in 2005 .
Metlife critical illness insurance pays a lump sum to the beneficiary of the policy if the insured person develops one of the qualifying health conditions . Metlife 's critical illness insurance also offers options for the dependents and spouses or domestic partners of the insured person . It is a group policy .
Metlife is one of the largest life insurance companies in the world by total assets and life insurance in force . It has a huge retention capacity to underwrite risk without reinsurance assistance . MetLife underwrites their prospects through a medical due diligence process and financially validates the requested coverage . An offer is made to the prospective policy owner and if accepted and bound with the required premium is placed in force as an active policy .
MetLife offers a variety of life insurance products in both individual and group policies . Therefore , each policy will work according to the type of life insurance it is . Their term insurance is guaranteed not to go up for the entire term . Their universal life guarantees depend on what type of policy it is . You can contact an agent that carries MetLife polices -LRB- including me -RRB- to find out about a particular product .
MetLife offers two types of Life Insurance policies in relation to exams . One type does require an exam , and one type does not . Also , if you are very young , apply for a very small Whole Life policy , or some other circumstances , even those policies that normally require an exam may not require one for you .
The Met is the largest insurance company by total assets . Here are the companies that comprise the Met . American Life Insurance Company , MetLife Alico Life Insurance KK -LRB- MetLife Alico Japan -RRB- , First MetLife Investors Insurance Company , General American Life Insurance Company , MetLife Insurance Company of Connecticut , MetLife Investors Insurance Company , MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company , Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the New England Life Insurance Company . Met has been in business for 140 years .
Metlife does not offer an expected time frame for processing a life insurance claim on any of their death claim materials . They do try to offer explanations that will avoid certain situations to hang up claim processing . Most life insurance claims take from a couple weeks to a couple of months to process .
It truly depends on your occupation and your medical history . For high risk jobs , a sub-standard carry like Lloyds of London or Fidelity offers great products . If you 're a physician , Standard , Principal or MetLife can offer very competitive rates . If you 're considering purchasing DI , ask your agent to shop around and provide you with multiple quotes . Remember , just because it 's the cheapest , does n't mean it 's the best !
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
MetLife offers several types of Disability Insurance policies . They offer both group and private long term and short term disability insurance , and offer disability insurance policies that are designed for certain occupations and business uses . To see the features of each type of policy , you can contact an agency that sells MetLife DI or contact MetLife directly .
I was not able to find a General Life Insurance Company . I did find General American Life Insurance which has been bought by Metlife Insurance . Metlife is a good strong company to work with . I would however recommend comparing rates for the type of insurance you are looking for as they will have different features .
The largest life insurance company in the United States -LRB- by assets -RRB- is presently the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company -LRB- aka MetLife -RRB- . MetLife is not the world 's largest life Insurer . The largest life insurer in the world -LRB- again by assets -RRB- is the Japan Post Insurance Company .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
When Is A Retirement Plan Top Heavy ?
A top-heavy plan is one that benefits company officers , owners , employee shareholders , etc. and/or key employees . If a qualified plan becomes top-heavy , there are top heavy tests that ensure the other employees receive fair to equal treatment with similar benefits under the plan . In general , the basic definition of a top heavy defined contribution plan is when total account balances of key employees exceed 60 % of the total retirement accounts .
A top-heavy plan is one that benefits company officers , owners , employee shareholders , etc. and/or key employees . If a qualified plan becomes top-heavy , there are top heavy tests that ensure the other employees receive fair to equal treatment with similar benefits under the plan . In general , the basic definition of a top heavy defined contribution plan is when total account balances of key employees exceed 60 % of the total retirement accounts .
A key employee for a 401k generally refers to top heavy rules for a defined benefit plan . If greater than 60 % of the present value of the cumulative accrued benefits of plan assets come from `` key employees '' , the plan is considered to be top heavy . A key employee is an employee that at any time during the year was 1 -RRB- someone who owned more than 5 % , 2 -RRB- a more than 1 % owner who was paid $ 150,000 or more or 3 -RRB- an officer that was compensated at more than $ 170,000 for 2014 . The IRS has a long list of guidelines -LRB- IRS 4.72.5 -RRB- for top-heavy plans and it is best to consult with someone who specializes in this area .
Yes , if the life insurance company does any type of a paramed exam , they will test you for nicotine . Whether they use a cheek swab , blood draw or urine sample , this is one of the top items tested . Typically smoker rates are charged two and half to three times the premiums of a non-tobacco user as it is proven to shorten one 's life . Here is something to keep in mind . Underwriters test for cotine not nicotine . Nicotine can leave the body within a couple of days for an occasional smoker . Cotine stays in the body 's system for up to 14 days . For a heavy smoker , nicotine gum or patch user , it takes a longer period of time to cleanse the system of all bad chemicals .
There are many factors that contribute to car insurance rates . Experience is one of them but it is n't weighted as heavy as other factors such as credit , driving history , and claims history . Another factor that will weigh heavy on rating would depend on if you are getting insurance for the first time because you just purchased a car or getting it for the first time while owning a vehicle for an extended period of time . As long as you can show proof -LRB- i.e Bill of Sale -RRB- that you made the car purchase without a trade in , most companies will not apply a tremendous surcharge . I recommend that you shop around because every company is different in their standards . I would stick with face-to-face quotes so you can ask all the questions that you have on your first insurance purchase . insurance is one of the few things that a human will outsmart a computer at anytime .
It will , but it also depends upon where the water came from . If there is a heavy wind and rain storm and the wind damages your roof , causing rain water to leak in and damage the inside of your home , there will be coverage for that . If on the other hand , the heavy rain does not causedirect damage to your home , but raises the water table in your property , which causeswater to leak into your basement , it is possible that there would not be any coverage for that because ground waterdamage is usually excluded under a homeowners policy . Be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverge for failure of any sewars or drainage systems like curtain drains or sump pumps . If you have such coverage , then you will be more likely to be covered if your basement fills with water as a result of any failure .
Comparing Medigap Plans -LRB- or Medicare Supplement Plans -RRB- can be very frustrating to most people . Calling all the different companies to review each plan and premium can take up a lot of time that you could be doing something else . However , a good independent agent will be able to do all the heavy lifting for you . They should also help match your needs to the plan that best fits your specific situation . Some things to consider when looking at plans : 1 . Would you like to go to any doctor you like ? 2 . Would you rather not have to get a referral to see a specialist ? 3 . Would you like to minimize large out of pocket expenses when you need care ? 4 . Would you rather not deal with a network ? We have taken it a step further and you can actually run a quote from all the major carriers on our website .
ERISA qualified plans are generally audited annually to ensure compliance against discrimination -LRB- being top heavy -RRB- . This test makes sure that the plan is not over favoring the companies highest paid employees . If discrimination is discovered , that funds are returned to highly compensated employees to being the plan back to compliance .
Medigap or Medicare Supplement insurance coverage is offered by private insurance companies . All Medigap Plans are standardized , so the benefits with Plan F from ABC insurance company are the same exact benefits with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . Often times , Seniors are only aware of a few insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans . This is because of their heavy marketing techniques . In reality , there are many more insurance companies available and probably most of them you 've never heard of -- but since Medigap Plan benefits are standardized by CMS , it does n't matter what the name of the insurance company is . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can share which insurance companies are in your area and which ones have the best price . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you find Medigap coverage in your area .
In most cases , yes chewing tobacco is viewed by the majority of life insurance companies the same as smoking . Nicotine is the key addictive ingredient that causes a higher rating . Therefore , nicotine gum and patches are rated as well . Life insurance companies typically double or triple rates based on nicotine use . However , there are a few carriers that under certain circumstances will underwrite you at a non tobacco rate . When you are being tested , underwriters use your paramed exam results , blood and urine , to detect your tobacco habits . They test for cotine instead of nicotine which stays in your system 14 days longer than nicotine . So , if you are an occasional cigar smoker , for example , you would need to be free of tobacco for at least 2 weeks prior to testing . If you are a heavy user it could take months to clear your system . Feel free to contact me if you have any further questions . I am always glad to help .
Your homeowner 's insurance will pay for a new roof if the claim you submit is covered under the policy . For example , fire , heavy wind , tornado , and other weather-related claims are typically covered . However , the normal wear and tear of a roof is not a situation where you can submit for a claim .
If you die from alcoholism , yes , it will be covered by life insurance , unless for some reason it was specifically excluded , which would virtually never have been done . Even if you concealed the fact that you were a heavy drinker , it would still be covered after two years . Only suicide is excluded and then only for the first two years . Thank you . GARY LANE .
It depends on the origin and cause of the water . A distinction has to be made between flooding and water damage . A flood is usually caused by external water rising , usually from heavy rain or a river overflowing . Flood is not covered by most homeowner policies . Water damage is generally defined as water hitting your home before touching the outside ground . It can originate from a roof leaf or a broken pipe and is usually covered by homeowners insurance .
Great question ! It does n't have to , but if someone were to damage the vehicle , either through vandalism or collision , your expense to fix the car is totally yours . It may be worth it to you , especially if you are n't going to be driving it for awhile , to find a policy that is inexpensive , but gives you some protection , especially if it is a heavy traffic road . Thanks for asking !
Presently , fixed annuity rates are paying 2.95 % guaranteed for five years and 3.25 % for ten years . The spread is only 35 basis points for double the time period . Not a good deal for consumers if rates go up . And keep in mind that ten year annuities generally have heavy surrender charges , so it would be punitive to move them in a rising interest rate market .
Universal Variable Life Insurance is a policy with is a type of permanent coverage in which the cash portion of the policy is invested in securities . These policies are heavily marketed because of the high commissions , however I would look at an indexed universal policy if you are looking for growth . Most independent sources recommend variable products only if you are young enough to overcome some heavy charges .
Alcoholism can be an issue with purchasing life insurance . It can lead to rated up premiums all the way to an outright decline of life insurance . There needs to be a record establishing alcoholism . A medical history of treatments or rehabilitation . An arrest record including but not limited to one or more DUIs . Be careful with self diagnosis . Just because you have a headache does n't necessarily mean you have a brain tumor . You can be a heavy drinker and not be diagnosed as an alcoholic . Alcoholism needs to be a documented problem either medically or lawfully . Always be careful with self diagnosis .
To prepare for your life insurance exam , I agree with Matt 's advice . In addition , drink lots of water ahead of time , and try to avoid extremes -LRB- e.g. do n't overeat , overdrink , overexercise , or hang around heavy smokers -RRB- the day before your exam . If you do n't feel well , put off your exam , especially if you have diabetes , MS or other health conditions that can be exasperated by having a bug . Finally , be prepared to answer health questions that you may have answered before . Asking the same question more than once helps convince insurance companies that the information is correct .
That is a great question ! This is one of the occasions where an independent agent is really worth finding . They can look at several companies for you , and look for the best company for you . There are some companies that will look at your weight seriously as a consideration , -LRB- too heavy , and too thin -RRB- some that give it some consideration , and some that do n't ask at all . After finding one of them , it will come down to your health , and what issues you have . If you would like some help , please do n't hesitate to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
In Canada , they do test for the active ingredient in marijuana . Typically through bodily fluids such as blood and urine . Any presence used to be a decline . Now recreational marijuana users are considered at the same rate as cigarette smokers by many companies . Heavy users are often rated or declined . It is very important that you are truthful when you complete your application for insurance to avoid problems at claim time . An independent life insurance broker , who represents several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Would You Buy Life Insurance For A Baby ?
There are a couple reasons parents would buy life insurance on their baby . For one a true whole life insurance policy accumulates cash value which could be used to help out in life events such as college or a wedding . It also guarantees the insurability of the child . For example , one of my co-workers purchased life insurance on his young son who developed diabetes at age 13 . If he had not done so , his son would have a hard time finding a company who would insure him .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
There are many reasons that you would want to get a life insurance policy for a baby . First of all to guarantee insurability for the little one . To get the policy issued at the lowest rate possible for a second . Conceivably you could have a policy that would be completely paid up before age 18 and provide them coverage for the rest of their lives . There are too many reasons to lists . Contact your local agent to find out what coverages are available in your area .
There is nothing that makes me feel more depressed then to see families and kids on the street holding a car wash for a friend or family member that did n't buy some form of life insurance for their children . Most insurance companies offer `` Level Term '' riders that may be added to the parents policies that will allow the parent to insure all of his or her current and future children . These riders also guarantee the insurability of the children as they are usually convertable to their own private policy 's when they reach either age 21 or 25 . sometimes the insurance company will allow the child to change his or her policy 's face amount up to 5 times the amount of the original rider without evidence of insurability . The best thing about these riders is the price , whether you have one child or 20 children you can insure them all for one low price under this rider . If you are an insurance agent please do not forget to offer this rider to the parents that you are insuring .
Parents have their reasons for getting Life Insurance on a baby . Cover basic funeral costs Providing a `` gift '' that will grow to be an Asset for future use . Provide for future insurance needs locking in the lowest possible rates . Designing a policy that could be `` paid-up '' in a set amount of time , say 20 years , more or less . Keep in mind that companies will generally require that you the parent have Life Insurance on yourself first . Insurance Companies look at this as `` who is depending on the baby for support ? '' Since no one is then you have to justify the need . Companies would like parents to have up to 4x the amount of coverage on the baby although each company is different and the rules might be bent if a good case is made .
why do babies need life insurance ? There are several reasons life insurance for a baby makes sense . One is simply just planning for the future for that child through a cash value policy that grows over time . Coupled with a guaranteed insurability option , a good plan takes away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' down the road . That in it 's self is very important . Taking away `` no '' is a wonderful feeling . Another reason is what if the unthinkable happens ? Would a family need time , would they need money to have a service or even buy a headstone ? Imagine the stress of having to budget the service for your child ? How much hate and resentment would happen having to tell a spouse `` no , it costs too much '' ?
Why should anyone buy life insurance on a newborn baby ? That 's probably the 1st question anyone would ask when the subject is brought up . I can think of a couple good reasons right off the top of my head . 1 -RRB- should the baby die the last thing anyone would want would be to have the costs of a funeral added to the burden of grief ! 2 -RRB- Whole life insurance is a really great way to begin a savings fund for the child that will grow tax-free and at a much faster rate than any savings , CD or money market account . And the money can be available for college funding or a first car when the time comes !
The most important reason to get life insurance for a baby , in my opinion , is to assure that the baby will be able to get and have life insurance for the rest of their life . If a baby or child develops a health condition such as type 1 diabetes , is found to have a heart murmur or congenital condition , or even develops a mental or emotional disorder , it can be extremely hard to find life insurance for tthm . Often , they must wait until they are adults to apply , and if the condition is serious enough , they may need to wait until they are 50 years old to apply for a guaranteed issue policy . If the baby is put on a child rider or gets their own policy before anything like this arises , that baby -LRB- then child , then adult -RRB- is assured to have life insurance rated Standard for the rest of his/her life . Granted , there will be a limit on the amount , but it will be reasonably priced . When a tragedy occurs in the life of a child , it is just great to have something good turn up in a situation like that .
Why should you buy coverage for a new baby ? Well three basic reasons may apply as to `` why '' ? First , if you were to lose your child , what would you do ? Would you go into work on Monday ? Would you and your spouse agree on the cost of the service and headstone ? Sorry to be blunt . A life insurance policy lets you take a breath , decide on your service and reduces the `` what can we afford to do ? '' in the situation . Second , you can purchase guaranteed insurability for your child 's future when you build your policy . These options take away the insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child 's future purchases , no matter their health . Finally , depending on your choice of policy , you get your child a foothold in their financial future . You are knocking out one of the foundation pieces to a financial future while the price is super cheap . One of many things down , more choices for other dollars later .
If a group health plan , health insurance company , or health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- provides maternity benefits , it may not restrict benefits for a hospital stay in connection with childbirth to less than 48 hours following a vaginal delivery or 96 hours following a delivery by cesarean section.You can not be required to obtain preauthorization from your plan in order for your 48-hour or 96-hour stay to be covered . -LRB- However , certain requirements that you give notice to the plan of the pregnancy or the childbirth may apply . -RRB- The law allows you and your baby to be released earlier than these time periods only if the attending provider decides , after consulting with you , that you or your baby can be discharged earlier.In any case , the attending provider can not receive incentives or disincentives to discharge you or your child earlier than 48 hours -LRB- or 96 hours -RRB- . If your state has a law that provides similar hospital stay protections and your plan offers coverage through an insurance policy or HMO , then you may be protected under state law rather than under the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act . Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
Getting life insurance for your baby will ensure that your young adult child is able to have life insurance . You can either purchase a Whole Life policy for your baby , or else add your baby to your policy on a child rider . You can cover all children with one child rider at a very low price . If death would occur , it would pay the benefit . But also , it allows each child to convert that rider to a permanent policy when they become adults , whether or not they are able to be insured for medical reasons .
An expecting parent has at least 20 years of reasons for life insurance ahead of them . Would there be enough income to pay for good childcare if one parent passed ? How about basketballs shoes , cheerleading outfits , study guides for the SAT ? How about college ? Most expecting parents have not had time to build up a good nest egg before the birth of their first child , and it is really hard to grow it while raising children . Life Insurance provides a large , immediate source of income upon death , and has a very reasonable price at your age . Since your need is limited , 20 to 30 year Term insurance would suffice on each of you , and that is very affordable . If you like , you can add your baby to the policy for about $ 5/month , and that will ensure that he/she is able to get life insurance for the rest of his/her life , even if he/she would develop an uninsurable health condition later on . Such an exciting time and what a lucky baby to have such thoughtful parents . Wishing you all the best . PS You will probably need to wait until a few weeks after the baby is born for Mom to get her policy .
As Peggy noted , it 's really cheap to buy life insurance on a newborn baby . The primary underwriting factor is the responses to yes or no health questions - there are no exam requirements for them because of their age -LRB- they 're babies ! -RRB- . Many parents look at buying a whole life policy because it 's very cheap and can be kept for life . A great rider to look at adding to a WL policy on a child is a guaranteed insurability option rider -LRB- GIO -RRB- - in short , this rider says that you can increase the face amount at certain intervals with no additional medical underwriting . Another option many parents consider is adding a child rider onto their own policy - this is a very cheap and easy way to add term coverage for your children . Let me know if I can be of further help . Thanks !
Life insurance premiums are based on age , so it is very inexpensive to purchase it for a baby . The health of the baby , duration of coverage , and carrier also affect premium so it would be difficult to quote all of the scenarios in the scope of this answer . To provide a very rough idea of cost ; the premium for $ 10,000 of coverage will be around $ 4.50 per month . The parent may want to use life insurance as a savings account for the baby in which the premium will depend on the factors above and also how much the parent wants to save . It is an excellent idea to start early with insurance as it guarantees the child 's insurability as they get older . Please discuss the many options available with a knowledgeable insurance professional .
That is a great question ! In almost every case , the cost of having health insurance will be greatly cheaper than the cost of carrying and delivering a full term baby , especially if the baby has special care needs . It is a much wiser decision to have insurance coverage , and with the Affordable care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- giving help in paying for the insurance if you qualify , -LRB- Go to www.healthcare.gov to see if you qualify -RRB- it is in many cases more affordable than ever . Having insurance coverage may allow you to provide much better care for you , and your baby , than you could afford otherwise . Thank you for asking !
It does n't but I guess it really should . Babies are more of a driving distraction than cell phones . Those little muchhkins have all the noise distractions of a loud car radio combined with the visual distractions similar to texting while driving . Plus they can assult your sense of smell and even throw unsavory things at the driver . If things were truely fair , babies would raise your insurance rates ... but they do n't . IF you have the correct car seats and always use them , you should never have a rate up for having a baby . Better off ... leave them home with dad or grandma and keep your eyes on the road .
The cost of having a baby without health insurance could be as low as five thousand dollars if a mid wife and birthing center are used , and millions of dollars if your baby needs specialized care in a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit . The Affordable Care Act provides benefits for maternity and newborn care , plus hospitalization . Women can purchase a policy while pregnant that covers her preexisting pregnancy with no waiting period , provided she enrolls during the open enrollment period . The open enrollment period for 2014 ends on March 31 . The premiums paid for a policy would be much smaller than funding the costs of having a baby yourself .
Parents have their reasons for getting Life Insurance on a baby . Cover basic funeral costs Providing a `` gift '' that will grow to be an Asset for future use . Provide for future insurance needs locking in the lowest possible rates . Designing a policy that could be `` paid-up '' in a set amount of time , say 20 years , more or less . Keep in mind that companies will generally require that you the parent have Life Insurance on yourself first . Insurance Companies look at this as `` who is depending on the baby for support ? '' Since no one is then you have to justify the need . Companies would like parents to have up to 4x the amount of coverage on the baby although each company is different and the rules might be bent if a good case is made .
No you will have to wait until the baby is born . No insurance company will want to accept the increased risk of complications . Disability policies are designed to protect againstunforeseenrisks . If the company knows you are pregnant then it also knows that there may be a period of time you will not be able to work after the baby comes . It would be buying a claim .
Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is Comprehensive Long Term Care Insurance ?
Comprehensive Long Term Care Insurance is long term care insurance that will pay for care received in a nursing home , assisted living , adjust day care , or one 's own home . In other words , the triggers qualify you for the care and you spend the benefit where you wish . The policy is not restricted to paying only if the care is received at a certain facility .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
I believe you are referring to Long Term Care Insurance . There are a variety of different long term policies from many insurance companies . Most policies sold today are comprehensive and offer a daily benefit that can be used in your home , adult day service centers , hospice care , respite care , assisted living facilities and Alzheimer 's special care facilities and nursing homes . In a home setting , comprehensive polices generally cover skilled nursing care , occupational , speech , physical and rehabilitation therapy . You can also get help with personal care , such as bathing and dressing . In order to receive long term care expense reimbursement , you need to qualify . Generally , that means the failure of the insured to perform 2 out of 6 of the activities of daily living -LRB- ADLs -RRB- . There is also an `` elimination period '' after which the benefits begin . Policies vary in what they actually cover and there is much you should know about long term care and you need to find a qualified insurance agent near you that can help you understand it .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The time to purchase Long Term Care is when you are healthy and in your fifties or sixties . I do not know of any company that will issue a Long Term Care Policy to an eighty year old and if there were the premium would be extremely high . There are some alternatives however . Some companies will offer Short Term Care or Home Health Care policies up to age 85 . While not as comprehensive as a full Long Term Care policy they can help with the high cost of care when needed . There are also other planning solutions that can help . A Long Term Care Resource Planner can help find a solution .
Deciding to purchase long term care insurance is an important financial decision so first and foremost be sure to work with an insurance professional with experience in long term care insurance and access to a range of top rated long term care insurance companies . That person can help you select coverage that matches your needs and preferences . There are many choices and different ways to design coverage . For example , what services are covered by the policy ? Some policies may be limited , sometimes to appear inexpensive relative to other policies so ask when benefits begin and if the policy is comprehensive or limited to nursing home care . Recent years have seen many large insurers exit the market so ask about the ratings and financial strength of the insurance companies being quoted and about the insurers history in offering long term care insurance . As you evaluate various policy features and benefits , keep in mind that the choices you make can affect the premiums you pay and the benefits you are entitled to receive . You are unlikely to want to pay for everything you would ideally like in a policy so your choice of insurance professional may be crucial in helping you determine how best to balance premium and benefits in your long term care policy .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Long term care insurance provides benefits that extend beyond those paid under Medicare and most private insurance . The benefit is normally paid in months and at a predetermined level . The extremely helpful insurance is sometimes offered as a benefit by employers . If the employer pays the premium , the employer is able to deduct that cost from his own taxes as a reasonable business expense -LRB- employee benefit . -RRB- The employee does not incur any income tax liability as a result . When a benefit is received it comes to the employee free of income tax . There arent any non-discrimination rules that require an employer cover all of the employees . Executives should consider accepting an Employer Paid Long Term Care Insurance policy in exchange for a salary reduction . It is a win situation for the employer and also a win situation for the highly valued employee . This benefit can be combined with a more comprehensive medical health care plan that includes additional benefits such as a comprehensive annual physical examination . This benefit can also be combined with a supplemental disability benefits program for valuable employees . Employer paid long-term care insurance is often combined with retiree medical insurance . Among employers the trend is to reduce or eliminate retiree medical benefits to the rank and file employees . For highly compensated employee there is a trend towards cost sharing arrangements for medical expenses after retirement .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
I Am Disabled When Do I Get Medicare ?
Disabled individuals may qualify for Medicare subject to certain conditions . You must meet the Social Security definition of disability and , in most cases , have received SSDI checks for 2 years . Specific medical conditions , such as ESRD -LRB- end stage renal disease -RRB- may qualify you for immediate Medicare benefits . Medicare Advantage plans will not offer coverage if you have ESRD .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
This really is n't an insurance question as a political one . I can only offer my opinion and it may not be agreeable to some depending on where you live . Do I think gun owners should carry liability insurance by mandate ? Yes , I do . And I will tell you why . Accidents happen . Guns get discharged accidently , hunters and hikers are accidently shot every year . What happens when the person who has been shot , but not killed ? Who pays their bills ? Who covers the cost of their care ? Should the person responsible be able to say , sorry I have no insurance , too bad for you . Someone already cited `` part '' of the 2nd amendment in a post . Let me add the other part , '' A well regulated Militia '' . I am a well regulated insurance agent , which means I am licensed for insurance sales and required to carry `` E&O -LRB- errors and omissions -RRB- insurance '' to protect the consumer . If by accident I were to cause harm , there would be coverage to help them . It 's an expense to me as I pay for this coverage . I do n't mind that much because if for some reason , by accident I created a harmful situation I would want to provide more than an I 'm sorry .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
That 's a great question ! You google `` local independent insurance agents '' . Then work your way down the list until you find one you like . I am not a fan of trusting my financial future or the protection of my family to anyone that I do n't know . If I have a problem , I want to know the person that will handle it , and who will be returning my call . I also know that internet sites are set up to give you `` best case '' prices when you shop , that can turn out to be different in reality . A live agent can give you an exact premium price , and details on any reasons why there might be difficulties in getting the best rate . I also am leery of hackers getting all of my information , and am not a fan of putting it out there in the cloud for the picking . There are a lot of things that are good to buy on the internet , but in my opinion , life insurance is n't one of them . Thanks for asking !
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
The key word in this question is `` cover '' . All life insurance can be used toward that purpose if the beneficiary chooses to use it that way . Policies can be made with a Funeral Home as the beneficiary but only one kind of policy will answer the question of `` will it cover '' . When I first entered the insurance profession in 1957 we sold a $ 1,000 or $ 2,000 ordinary -LRB- permanent , whole -RRB- life policy for a person wanting funeral expense coverage . As I increased my knowledge in the insurance industry I went to including a `` Final Expense '' amount in the practice of total planning of a persons insurance needs . At that time we figured $ 10,000 sufficient to meet the needs of final hospital expenses , taxes , burial , etc. . It was not until I was Executive Vice President of a company that was sold to a company that wrote burial insurance policies through the funeral home . I became licensed with the new company and learned , at a much older age , that there is only one policy that can REALLY say it will cover funeral costs at the persons death . That policy is available through funeral homes , it is an increasing whole life policy that the funeral home accepts for the purchase of a funeral at a specific time and then guarantees to give that equivalent funeral whenever the person dies without any further cost except some expense that might be beyond those spelled out in the contract . I began to teach classes for CE on this kind of policy for our state and for many insurance agencies . This is a completely different policy that can be of great benefit to a local independent agent working with a local funeral home . As I began to teach about this type of Life Insurance I found most Life Insurance agents had never heard of it or had been sold against it by companies writing supposed , last expense , death benefit policies . I have now written this type of policy for almost 20 years and the families of the deceased have nothing but praise for a properly planned REAL Funeral Policy . At 81 years old the death benefit of my funeral policy now exceeds the death benefit of the first policy I bought for total family protection . If I am blessed with a few more years it may equal what I used to think was a huge Life Insurance policy . I am still writing these policies on my friends . I have learned one thing over the years ! In the insurance business never close your mind to a type of policy until you have totally studied it yourself rather than being sold a bill of goods by a company that may not have the policy you are trying to learn about . Worry about that client , first and foremost , and do the best job you possibly can for that individual by increasing your knowledge of this business . I have covered some of the aspects of this policy in my recently published second edition of `` The Prophets Dollar '' , available on Amazon .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
USAA is a highly rated insurance company and I am sure anything they offer will be of high quality but you need to make sure that policy meets your needs . How do you do that ? Sit down with your significant other and write down what it is that you want the policy to provide . Then call the company and say , I want a health insurance plan that will pay 80 % of all charges in the event I am hosiptialized with a $ 500 deductible . I want the policy to allow each member of my family to go the doctor up to 4 times a year and only have to pay a $ 30 copay . I want that policy to pay 80 % of any prescriptions that I or my family memebers need to purchase . Do you have a policy that meets my expectations and if so what do it cost ?
That is an interesting question ! I 'd list as choices to pick for answers to your question : A. -RRB- I need to start saving for retirement when I am 30 - or so . B. -RRB- I will get enough social security , disability , and Medicare that I really wo n't need to save C. -RRB- I need to save enough to last 10 years D. -RRB- I need to have at least a years salary put away to be good E. -RRB- All of the above Which answer would you choose ? Contact me for the one I 'd choose , and why . Thanks for asking !
I am not sure I am qualified to tell you how to become the best life insurance agent , I do n't even know who that would be . But after 22 years in the business , I can tell you the things you need to become a very good life insurance agent . First and foremost become a student of the industry . Never stop educating yourself and products and regulations . I am not talking about CE credits but carrier trainings and brokerage trainings , this is invaluable to your success . Next learn to be a good resource for people , be a giver not a taker . Learn appropriate networking skills about how to help clients and prospects , not just sell them something , be a problem solver . Sell like a teacher not a salesman . Last , actually learn social media and how to effectively use it to grow your practice . Do n't guess , there is nothing worse than an agent or broker selling all over the place . Be helpful and relevant . I wish you the best of luck with your growth . Feel free to contact me anytime .
I have a hard time imaging how backdating a car insurance policy could ever be good for the insurance carrier so , all the carriers I am familiar with refuse and prohibit backdating . I can think of a couple of reasons it is desirable to backdate insurance from the customer point of view : 1 -RRB- To be able to prove insurance to a regulatory or financial entity on a certain prior date when coverage was not maintained . 2 -RRB- To be able to obtain coverage for a loss and avoid out of pocket expenses on a certain prior date when no coverage existed . Most carriers carefully underwrite the reason why any date but the present date is installed on an application for insurance . It is often also true that state law makes it illegal for an agent to backdate coverage . It does n't matter if it is car insurance , home insurance , or even life insurance , backdating is a bad idea for the insurer and the agency or agent . On this point , however , there are companies in the life insurance portion of my business that will permit backdating to save age . They wo n't accept this provision if the insured is not healthy or there are health events that create concern in the period of time back to the prior birth date . If you are not healthy now , they wo n't issue the coverage . Then , if they agree , all the premium back to the prior date will need to be paid but , the customer will enjoy a permanently lower rate based upon the prior age so this is the only time I am aware of when backdating - and I use the term very loosely here - is permitted on a written insurance policy . On car insurance , no backdating method I know of exists for all the reasons I have written -LRB- and some I have n't -RRB- .
You should purchase life insurance when you feel it is appropriate . I purchased my first whole life policy when I was 18 years old . I wanted to pay for my final expenses , establish my insurability and I looked to the policy to help me save money in a disciplined manner . When I married , I increased my policy to provide for my brides needs should I die prematurely . I still buy life insurance and am contemplating an additional purchase .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is State Farm a good company for Life Insurance ?
Well to join the love fest . I agree with Tyler and Scott . While State Farm is a highly rated company and does a good job on the Home and Auto side . Their life insurance offerings are just not competitive . As Scott said they really push their non guaranteed Universal Life and may add term to boost the face amount . Their underwriting is yet another issue . Being primarily a property and casualty company they have stricter Life Insurance underwriting than a Life Insurance company . Many times the agent is not that involved in the sale or service which may be relegated to the customer service rep. I have been a licensed agent for a long time . I use a property and casualty company for my property and casualty coverages and Life Insurance companies for my Life Insurance .
I agree with what Tyler said . As a rule , most property and casualty companies -LRB- that mainly sell auto , homeowners and business insurance -RRB- are worth looking at but definitely not the ONLY place you want to look for life insurance . State Farm is a top rated insurance company and is a brand you should consider in your research . A wise consumer should always shop all insurance purchases against dozens of other companies before making a purchase . If the savings are substantial , I would buy elsewhere . If the price is close ... State Farm is fine . An independent insurance broker can help you shop dozens of companies all at one time .
State Farm is a perfectly fine company with strong financial ratings . But , their Life Insurance is not what most agents would define as competitive . In fact , it often tends to be more expensive when compared to other companies . State Farm -LRB- and Allstate -RRB- often offer to discount your Home or Auto if you place your Life Insurance with them . On the surface it sounds like a great deal . But you need to actually compare the Home/Auto discount , to the difference in Premium for the more competitive Life Insurance Policy . Every time I have done this with a person , the lower priced Life Insurance Policy saves a lot more money than a discount other policies . Speak to an independent Agent who can compare multiple companies and show you the most competitive for your situation . Or visit a website such as the one on my profile and you can compare quotes yourself .
State Farm is a good company , and their term life insurance is good . Like every other insurance company , State Farm has people they can not insure , and people who will get good prices with them . You can go to a website to compare quotes from other companies to the State Farm quote you have . Be sure that you are comparing the same term length and the rating for which you qualify . You might qualify for a different health rating with different companies . An agent can pinpoint that for you .
Yes , State Farm does offer life insurance . However , I have some clients who bought State Farm life insurance and then ended up buying different policies because they were much less expensive . Shopping for life insurance with an independent agent like myself gives you access to over 70 A rated or better life insurance companies . Many of these life insurance companies offer policies less expensive than State Farm and they may be less restrictive when it comes to certain health conditions . If you use State Farm for your other insurance needs , I would highly recommend you shop your life insurance with an independent agent because you will most likely save a significant amount of money .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Yes , the Farm Bureau does offer life insurance . You can contact your state Farm Bureau to find an agent . Or you can get a quote via the internet from United Home Life , of whom the parent company is United Farm Family Life Insurance Co , which operates as a subsidiary of the Indiana Farm Bureau . UHL provides life insurance in most states .
Currently , the largest US auto insurance company is State Farm , assuming we use written premiums as the criteria . State Farm has offices throughout the US . Following State Farm is Warren Buffet 's Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- Geico and other companies -RRB- , Allstate , Progressive , Farmers and USAA . Of course , these rankings change fairly often . In fact , Berkshire just recently passed Allstate for the Number 2 position . Many local companies in your area may not be the biggest carriers , but still write a lot of local business . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
State Farm does have Disability Insurance that it offers for purchase . Their plans include regular Disability Insurance that pays a benefit to the disabled person to be used as they wish , which State Farm calls Disability Income Insurance . State Farm also offers Mortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance .
In Wisconsin Rural Mutual Insurance Company which is a part of Farm Bureau Financial Services offers renters insurance . I can only speak for Wisconsin , but Farm Bureau Financial Services does operate in other states within the United States and handles personal lines with other companies in those states . If you are in Wisconsin give me a call and I can try to help you with coverage if you are not in Wisconsin , then I would suggest contacting your local Farm Bureau office to ask them for a local agent .
Yes , State Farm does offer Long Term Disability Insurance under the name , `` Disability Income Insurance '' . State Farm also offersMortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance . You would need to contact a State Farm agent to apply for this coverage .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
I used to work for State Farm before becoming an independent insurance broker . Here are your options in the order that I would recommend them . 1 -RRB- Call your State Farm Agent . He or she can take down the claim information and submit it to the claims department for you . Your agent might also be able to tell you what is likely and unlikely to be covered by your policy . He/She will also be able to explain the claims process and provide you with updates . 2 -RRB- Call the claims department directly at 800-782-8332 . They can take your call 24 hours a day 7 days per week . 3 -RRB- File your claim online at WEBSITELINK 4 -RRB- Download the State Farm App and file a claim with your mobile device .
State Farm does write homeowner insurance in most States . There may be depending on the location of the home , the condition of the home , the type of homeand size of home restrictions on the policy . This would apply to all carriers not only State Farm . If your home is located in a brush area , some carriers may not write a policy , other carriers may charge a higher premium.You should contact an agent in your area and the agent will be able to sit down and discuss in detail what he/she can do for you . Good luck !
I agree with what Tyler said . As a rule , most property and casualty companies -LRB- that mainly sell auto , homeowners and business insurance -RRB- are worth looking at but definitely not the ONLY place you want to look for life insurance . State Farm is a top rated insurance company and is a brand you should consider in your research . A wise consumer should always shop all insurance purchases against dozens of other companies before making a purchase . If the savings are substantial , I would buy elsewhere . If the price is close ... State Farm is fine . An independent insurance broker can help you shop dozens of companies all at one time .
State Farm does sell annuities in most states . Check with a local agent to make sure they are available in your state . To learn about State Farms annuity products go to their website WEBSITELINK It looks like they offer three products . Future Wealth Builder , Future Income Plus , and Guaranteed Income .
State Farm offers home insurance in most US states , but may not beselling new policies inevery state . For example , due to the risk of catastrophic claims costs from hurricanes , State Farm does not sell new home insurance policies in Florida.Contacta local State Farm agent , and they can let you know if State Farm home insuranceis available in your state .
Farm Bureau does not underwrite and issue health insurance under their own brand name . But in some states Farm Bureau may have a marketing arrangement with health insurance carriers allowing their agents to offer health insurance to Farm Bureau policyholders . This type of arrangement is not unusual and widely used by multi-line carriers .
Health insurance through state farm is actually completed through Assurant Health -LRB- via a partnership with the carrier - state farm does not sell health insurance plans themselves -RRB- . The cost for health insurance varies from person to person . Your age , where you live , if you use tobacco products , which plan you choose -LRB- e.g. metal level -RRB- , and if you qualify for a subsidy to reduce your premium will determine how much a good policy is going to cost . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . All of the plans offer good coverage . A silver or gold plan are your middle of the road type of plans because they provide strong coverage at an affordable price . I always recommend consulting with an experienced health insurance broker before you apply for anything . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
