start question
long-term-care-insurance
Can You Have Long Term Care Insurance And Medicaid ?
Yes , you can have Long Term Care Insurance and Medicaid at the same time . When you have both , Medicaid is the secondary payer and your private Long Term Care policy is the primary payer for your long term care costs . it not common for persons to receive both , but it is possible .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
If you do not have an estate to protect then you may not need Long Term Care . If you can qualify for Medicaid or a Medicaid waiver program then you do not need long term care . If you do not mind spending down all you have worked for during your life to go on Medicaid then you do not need long term care . If you have an estate you want to pass to your heirs , loved ones you want to protect from the burdens of caring for you when you become sick and can no longer care for yourself then you do need long term care insurance . If you want choices on where you are cared for then you need long term care .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
The two main advantages of Long Term Care Insurance are : 1 -RRB- Paying for your long term care needs without having to spend down your assets , and 2 -RRB- Having a say in the care that you get . As Care Plan Coordinator for a nursing home , I saw the advantages of Long Term Care Insurance up close . It can enable you to get a private room , get out into your home more quickly , and other perks that are not possible when on Medicaid . Not everyone can afford Long Term Care Insurance , and Medicaid is a blessing for those who need it . But there definitely are advantages to having Long Term Care Insurance .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
In addition to the above comments , the family benefits . Average cost for a nursing home in the US , paid for long term care , usually in the range of $ 6,000.00 per month . An estate can be quickly depleted by the cost of long term care . Many people believe that Medicare pays for long term care , quite the opposite . Medicare pays only for the first 20 days . Medicaid pays for long term care , however you have to spend down any assets to qualify for Medicaid benefits . Long term care policies also come with a `` ROP '' or Return of Premium rider , a great option to consider when thinking about a long term care policy . Underwriting can be more challenging to overcome than the price of the policy .
You should purchase long term care insurance if you have a substantial amount of money saved up or invested that you do not want to go to pay for long term care costs , if such care is needed . When people become unable to care for themselves due to illness or age , and if it becomes necessary to hire in home care or move to where extended care is provided , the cost for that type of care is steep . It can deplete savings quickly , and in order for Medicaid to help , the law dictates that the person receiving the care must first deplete investments and assets down to a set amount . Having long term care insurance pays the bills for in home care , nursing home care , or other types of care that are needed , thus protecting assets and investments . Having this source of funding also allows you to make more choices in your care rather than having to rely on what Medicaid will allow .
There is no need to `` fix '' long-term care insurance because it is not broken . However , our current system of how we as a societyassist the growing number of elderly who may have no one to take care of them is in need of serious repair . Right now , if one can not afford the cost of long-term care , they must become `` indigent '' , that is to say , have less that about $ 2,000 in liquid assets and make less than $ 35/mo . -LRB- those numbers are adjusted annually and may not be accurate -RRB- . Assets excluded from the equation are one 's house , one 's car , and approximately $ 91,000 in savings or checking for spousal support . If you have more than that you have to `` spend down '' in order to qualify for government assistance -LRB- Medicaid - in CA , Medical -RRB- . The problem is thatthose programs are not well-funded and may not have sufficient funds when the current baby-boomer demographic hits the age when many will need expensive long-term care . The private sector provides a solution to this problem in selling long-term care insurance to the general public . However , while highly valuable , it is also highly priced . In fact , the middle class , for which it was originally designed to help , have been priced out of the market . Agents are challenged to come up with coverage that middle class folk can afford . The state and federal government 's solution is Medicaid . However , without reform , Medicaid - a partnership between the federal government and the states - will likely run out of money within the next 10-15 years . No one wants that to happen , but no one is doing anything about it right now . A congressional commission has been meeting since the beginning of summer 2013 on the matter of long-term care and should be coming out soon with recommendations for confronting the problem of how we help our elderly die with dignity .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
In all honesty , Long Term Care Insurance is not important for everyone . If you have very few assets and low income , you may sacrifice to pay Long Term Care premiums for extended care that may or may not be needed , and that Medicaid could cover if needed . If being able to choose your own place and type of extended care is important to you , then Long Term Care Insurance is a great thing to own even with low assets , as long as you can afford to pay the premiums . Long Term Care Insurance is most important for those who have an estate to protect . If you have saved up to pass an inheritance to your loved ones , or wish to pass a business to a successor , your intentions could be jeopardized if you were to to need care for an extended period of time . Long Term Care can pay that for you and allow your estate to remain untouched .
If Long Term Care Insurance is paying your bills for nursing home , assisted living , or at home care , you may not need Medicaid . However , if your Long Term Care Insurance does not keep up with the cost of your care , and you have sufficient out of pocket expenses that you need to go on Medicaid , having Long Term Care Insurance should not affect your Medicaid eligibility . Rather , you would probably not want to continue paying for your Long Term Care Insurance policy when Medicaid picks up the cost of your long term care .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Medicare is insurance coverage for `` medical care '' and does not cover the costs of assisted living facilities or long-term care facilities -LRB- custodial care -RRB- . Medicare will however cover qualified healthcare costs while a Medicare beneficiary is living at an assisted living facility . Medicare is more often used to pay for a skilled nursing facility or home health care . There are always exceptional circumstances that will allow Medicare to cover different types of care , for example , while in a qualified stay at a skilled nursing facility a Medicare beneficiary may also receive custodial care , but in most cases Medicare wont cover the costs of `` custodial care . '' In some states , Medicaid will pay for some of the costs associated with assisted livingif a qualified beneficiary has a limited income . Medicaid is designed to help seniors and some individuals with disabilities pay for healthcare when they are unable to pay for it themselves . Check on qualification requirements and available waiver programs for assisted living with your state Medicaid department . Individuals should seek out an extended care insurance specialist to understand options and formulate a plan to financially address assisted living or long term care needs before any such care may be needed . Jeffrey J. VanCleve 800-211-0017
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Average Cost Of A Whole Life Insurance Policy ?
Whole Life Insurance is going to take into consideration all the same factors as a term or Universal Life policy ! Whole life is going to be more expensive than term because of the factors of building cash value in the policy . I believe your best option is to contact an experienced agent to review your needs to assess what would be the best amount and product to go with . Keep in mind one of the most important things to consider is your policy having Living Benefits within the policy you choose !
The is no average cost that would be meaningful . That said , whole life insurance is generally more expensive because there is a cash value component of the policy unlike term coverage or certain universal life policies that generally have little or no cash value . Whole Life has certain benefits in certain situations , but it more complex than a discussion here allows .
A whole life policy is no different than any other type of life insurance policy when it comes to premiums or price . There are a lot of factors involved when underwriting whole life insurance such as build , lifestyle , occupation , health concerns , age , place of residence , etc. . Then you must consider the premium differences in life insurance companies . I have seen premiums vary on the same individual with different companies that one will charge double another company . I highly recommend using an experienced life insurance broker to shop out different carriers for the best price for your unique situation .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
The cost of life insurance increases with age . Obviously , the older we get the more likely we are to die , resulting in the life insurance company paying out a claim . In the words of George Lopez , `` Each Birthday is just another year closer to death '' or `` Studies have shown that the more birthdays you have the longer you live '' . The life insurance industry has amassed a large amount of data at what age people die and the cause of death . With a large enough population , they can predict accurately the average age of a man & woman at death , which helps them derive the cost of insurance based on the age of the insured . For example , in a 20-yr level term , they simply average out the cost of insurance for that 20 year span . For a permanent policy , they simply average the cost until the average age of death . So , all life insurance costs increase as we grow older . That is the reason why the premiums for insurance are much cheaper when we are younger . One last consideration ... because the cost of insurance increases , if you purchased a permanent -LRB- eg universal life , variable universal , etc -RRB- and paid only minimum premiums to keep the policy going , you may receive notification that you need to pay a large sum in premium to keep the insurance in force . This occurs when a policy is underfunded or in other words , the policy owner did not pay enough premiums in to the policy over time and it can not sustain the cost to pay out the death benefit .
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
Definitely , despite what some misinformed advisers may tell you . Whole Life first of all was never designed as an investment . While it is true you can accumulate more cash by buying term and investing the difference , my experience has shown that in most cases the average person , no matter how well intentioned , fails to keep up with the investment part . Investments are taxable as well whereas Whole Life is very tax friendly . I have seen many people in their 70 's and 80 's lose their life savings because of the high cost of long term care . Without life insurance they would have had nothing to help pay for the final expenses , leaving their families in a financial bind . For some people the cash value in their life insurance is the only savings they really have . I always recommend at least enough whole life to pay final expenses , allowing for inflation . If purchased at a young age it is not that expensive . After forming your insurance foundation , then you can begin accumulating cash using a combination of term and investments . Whole life insurance provides an excellent safety net for the average individual .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level plan -LRB- approximately 70 % coverage level and the most common plan design purchased -RRB- was $ 328 per month . This cost , in the overwhelming number of cases , will increase for 2015 plan year rates . As this is a national average figure and health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state , between regions within a state , and between different insurance carriers , it is only the roughest approximation of what health insurance might cost you . Your age and tobacco use status , plus the health insurance plan and insurance carrier you select are the primary factors in determining what your specific individual health insurance rates will be . Finally , whether or not you fall within the income ranges where you would qualify for some degree of an advanced premium tax subsidy will also factor into what your final monthly cost for individual health insurance would be .
The average cost of a Whole Life insurance policy largely depends on the age of the applicant , his/her health conditions , the face amount , and the carrier that is providing coverage . While it is easy to provide an average number -LRB- $ 500 - $ 900 -RRB- , it would be a bit misleading . There are simply too many variables to accurately provide specifics . Typically , among term , UL , VL and Whole Life plans , Whole Life will be the most expensive . Prices can certainly vary , including the dividend scale -LRB- if a participating policy -RRB- and guaranteed cash values . Let an experienced broker shop different companies for you so you find the most suitable policy .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
Because it 's not going to happen to them and it 's expensive . But the truth is the cost of the coverage is not nearly as expensive as the average cost of care and there is a pretty darned good chance they WILL need care . Roughly 70 % of people over 65 will need long term care services in their lifetime , 40 % of people currently receiving long term care services are aged 10-64 ! Average home health care expenses in Illinois average over $ 45,000 while a semi-private room averages around $ 70,000 , FAR more than the cost of the coverage to pay for it .
All premium quotes are dependent on the final underwriting outcome based on health , gender and age of the proposed insured . Heres an example , more of a rule thumb . Participating Whole Life Insurance purchased as a base policy with no riders is generally 20 % over its guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- counterpart . A 30 year old male nonsmoking with super preferred health covering $ 100,000 of GUL is averages around $ 550 annually with the top 25 the leading life insurance companies . The average participating whole life policy should come in around $ 675 annually . Always check the rate quoted by any online life insurance service to confirm the cost before moving forward .
As of July 2013 the average car insurance policy in the United States cost $ 964 per year . In Wisconsin the average policy cost $ 770 . So yes , on average , auto insurance appears to b cheaper in Wisconsin . Keep in mind that these are averages and your individual circumstances may result in higher or lower rates in Wisconsin .
I 'll add a bit to what Jeff has said because he made a very important point about Universal Life , that it 's a hybrid of whole life and term . Both whole life and Universal Life build cash value and have a separate portion that 's purely death benefit , but they differ greatly in how they operate internally . I 'll follow with explaining this difference . I 'm going to speak somewhat generally , so do n't kill me if a particular company 's product behaves a little differently . Whole Life - The internal cost of insurance is averaged over your life expectancy and stays the same year after year . Therefore , every year , the same amount of money goes toward the cost of insurance . The remainder goes to the cash account which grows by the insurance company adding money , or dividends , to the account . These dividends are set by the company based on the performance of it 's investments . It can change every year but most companies will guarantee a certain dividend . Premiums are level throughout the life of the policy and , if you pay your premium , your policy is guaranteed to be there for you . Universal Life - The internal cost of insurance increases every year based on your age just like term insurance does . The remainder goes into a cash account that the insurance company adds to as interest . This interest rate is also tied to the performance of their investments and will change from year to year . This means that , at the beginning of the policy , the internal cost of insurance is the lowest it will ever be and will increase every year . Premiums are flexible with a minimum amount due to cover expenses and the cost of insurance . Remainder goes into the cash account . There good and bad with both . With Whole life , your premiums will usually start out higher than with Universal , but they 'll never change and your policy is guaranteed to be there as long as you pay the premium . With Universal Life , the minimum premium will be much lower at inception but will increase every year as the cost insurance rises . This makes it extremely important to pay a target premium or more with universal life . That way , more money goes into the cash account to earn interest and offset cost of insurance increases as you get older . You can put more into the cash account and , therefore , it can grow more quickly , but there 's a flip side to that also . if you underfund it , the increasing cost of insurance can eat up all the cash value in later years and leave you with no cash and no death benefit . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and go through the entire process so he/she can put together the right program for you and your family .
The average cost of life insurance in Oregon depends on many factors . One big factor is age . A $ 250,000 twenty year Term policy for a 30 year old male at the best health class averages about $ 200 per year . At age 50 , the average rate for that same policy is approximately $ 600 per year IF he still has excellent health . The length of the term is also a big factor . Shorter terms cost less , but as can be seen in the example above . locking in the premium for as long as possible is often a good idea . That is partly because health also greatly affects life insurance rates , and health is more apt to slip away as people age . To find the average life insurance cost in the state of Oregon for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes and test out some different face amounts and term lengths . Then give that agency a call so that you can be sure all your health details are taken into consideration . That will help you get a fair price .
What is the average cost of health insurance ? Well , it 's going to depend on plan features , the age of the insured and the cost of care in their area . There really is n't a true average cost of health insurance as it just depends on who , what and where you are .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Buying Long Term Care Insurance A Good Idea ?
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance to their clients around age 50 . But the purchasing trend of long term care appears to be around age 60 . However , if youre family has a predisposition to disease , chronic hospitalization or nursing home confinement when theyre old , you may want to consider long term care insurance when youre young and healthy . You should purchase long term care for your retirement years . The statistics are significant that youll experience a need for assisted living or perhaps nursing home confinement . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 on medical and extended care during their retirement years . Securing long term care is important , especially when youre healthy and heading into your late fifties , early sixties .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is long term insurance a good buy ? Well it all depends on your needs and your assets . The big thing long term care does is provide you a pool of money to help you choose what you want to have happen regarding your care . Without long term care coverage any situation that comes up where you need care , you 'll be faced with where ever will take you and quite possibly a reduction in assets to cover the cost . The idea of long term care being a good buy is strictly in the eye of the beholder . For some it does n't matter and for others it is just a matter of plugging in the right variables to make the plan work best .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
In addition to the two excellent reasons Neil gave , I would add that a young person might want to buy Long Term Care insurance if you have a family history of rheumatoid arthritis , multiple sclerosis , diabetes , or other health conditions that increase the chances of needing long term care in the future . It is nearly impossible to get long term care insurance after being diagnosed with some diseases . Getting the coverage while you can is a good idea with any type of insurance that relies on medical underwriting , as Long Term Care insurance does .
If long term care insurance is purchased and used , it is usually a good buy . When a person buys insurance to cover a risk , and the risk happens , the insurance nearly always was a good purchase . Insurance companies go to great lengths to study statistics and actuarial tables to ensure that there are more than enough people buying policies to offset the claims that will be made . If the long term care insurance policy was not used , then it is not such a good buy . Unfortunately , no one knows that in advance . Getting a policy with a return of premium rider can help make up for the unknown . There are also life insurance policies with living benefits or riders that can be used for long term care type expenses . If the money is not on extended care needs , it is paid out as a death benefit to beneficiaries .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
The amount of monthly or daily benefit that you buy in long term care insurance depends on assets that you have to go towards long term care insurance costs and the rates at long term care facilities in your area . You can get a good idea of average rates by contacting a few facilities to know roughly what they charge in your area .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
A good time to buy Long Term Care insurance is before you have a serious health condition . LTC rates are based on health , especially the type of ailments that are more common among older people , such as crippling arthritis or stroke . Since the chances of one 's health deteriorating greatly increases in one 's 50 's and 60 's , it is a good idea to purchase Long Term Care Insurance in one 's 50 's , while you can lock in a good rate .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Leaky Roofs ?
There are circumstances where Homeowners Insurance may cover the damage caused by water leakage through a roof . It is best to check with your Insurance Professional , of course , about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . If the roof is compromised or damaged by a covered peril , say a severe windstorm for example , then if rain water leaks in and damages the interior of your home , you will probably have coverage . Likewise , and as was the case again this past winter in CT , if you have interior water damage that is caused by `` Ice damming '' which is a sever build up of ice forming at the lower edge of your roof , that then forces melted water up under your roofing material , there will also be coverage . These are only two examples , so again talk to your Insurance Professional .
The damage caused by a leaking roof will probably be covered by your homeowners policy . The repair to the roof itself would be covered if it was the result of one of the covered perils listed in your policy . If the loss comes from normal wear and tear the policy will not cover the roof repair . The roof is a critical component of a home and the owner should exercise care to maintain it in good condition . Failure to do that could result in cancellation .
Good question . In most cases damage from a leaky roof would be covered but the repair to the roof itself would not be covered . Keep in mind that wear & tear is an exclusion from many policies and the insurance company may be able to deny the claim if the loss can be shown to be a result of wear & tear . However , If the roof was damaged in a storm -LRB- from a covered peril -RRB- than the leak , and the roof repair , would be covered - subject to your policy deductible .
The correct answer here is `` it depends '' . Normally any water that enters from the outside will not trigger coverage . If the roof just plain leaked , then the building owner is responsible for any losses that happen . They have a duty to maintain their property . Their failure to maintain their property makes them responsible for any damage caused by the leaky roof . If , however , the roof leaked as a direct result of damage from a storm , it may be covered . The key words here are `` sudden and accidental '' . A leaky roof certainly is n't sudden , it 's a maintenance issue . My advice would be to contact the building owner and tell them what was damaged . I do n't know how your lease is written , but they are responsible for upkeep of the building . Therefore they should be responsible for any damage to your stuff if it was damaged because of the roof . They may not agree easily .
Yes . Generally homeowners insurance will cover the water damage from a leaky roof . If your carpet or personal property is damaged it should be covered under your policy as long as the roof leak came about unexpectedly . However , homeowners insurance will not cover the cost to repair the roof .
Good question . In most cases damage from a leaky roof would be covered but the repair to the roof itself would not be covered . Keep in mind that wear & tear is an exclusion from many policies and the insurance company may be able to deny the claim if the loss can be shown to be a result of wear & tear . However , If the roof was damaged in a storm -LRB- from a covered peril -RRB- than the leak , and the roof repair , would be covered - subject to your policy deductible .
The damage caused as the result of a leaky roof is probably covered . The damage to the roof would be covered if caused by a named peril . If the roof leak is covered it will be covered as a depreciated item by most insurance companies , rather than replacement . It is important to stop the leak as quickly as possible regardless of whether there is coverage or not . The damage to a house by water can be quite severe .
If the leaky roof was caused by a covered peril then it may be covered under your home owners policy . Every policy and company is different . It is recommended that you read your policy completely to know what is covered and what is excluded or call your local agent and have them explain what is covered and what is excluded within your policy .
This really depends on the cause of the leaky roof . If you file the claim with the insurer , they will send out an adjuster to assess the cause of the roof . If the leak is deemed to be caused by an event covered by your policy then the insurer will cover the leak . If the adjuster determines that the leak is caused by an event not covered by your policy -LRB- neglect/deferred maintenance being the most common example -RRB- than the insurer will not pay to fix the roof .
As a matter of practice most insurance companies look back at three years of losses . Companies are particularly concerned about recurring losses . These usually indicate poor maintenance or a design flaw in the residence . Recurring water damage losses from a leaky roof are a concern . There are situations where the initial repair did not fix the root cause and continued claims can be expected .
Mold is an issue that has received a great deal of attention in the media . A homeowners policy is designed to cover specified perils . Most of these perils are sudden and catastrophic . Mold is in every home all the time . Building materials provide a food source for mold . All that is needed for rapid growth of mold is moisture . The issue is frequently leaky pipes . The damage caused by leaky pipes is generally excluded . Speak to your agent before filing a claim to make sure that you have a solid claim .
Most homeowners policies wo n't cover problems with your foundation unless something sudden and accidental has happened to it . It 's designed to cover damage , not deterioration . It 's pretty rare for something to happen that damages a foundation . Most property claims are caused by storms or fire , and neither of these will usually damage foundation . If the foundation is sagging , leaking , crumbling , or deteriorating in some way , it 's the homeowner 's responsibility to maintain it . If you live in a newer home that has serious foundation problems , you may have recourse against the builder . Foundation problems can cause significant damage to your home and personal property . Your insurance company is n't going to repair or replace property damaged by a leaky or crumbling foundation .
Not all home owners policies are created equally ! The cause of loss determines if the damage will be covered by the insurance company . Most home owners policies cover a broad range of covered losses . However , some policies only cover `` named perils '' , like fire , wind or hail . Let 's assume you had the broad range . The cause of loss would be next . If the cause was a slow leaking overtime caused by not fixing a leaky pipe then insurance is not designed to cover that . But , if it was a sudden accidental -LRB- not if you took a baseball bat to it in anger -RRB- breaking of the toilet , it would cover the damage in this case . Usually , the damages in the sudden breakage are severe enough that you would not want to self-insure and fix it yourself . Recently , we had a client have a broken toilet causing water damage . It started out as ~ $ 1000 , but as the plumber got into the repairs & replacing the toilet , the water damage had found under the tile , which turned into about $ 8000 . So , we went from not filing to filing a claim . Check with your agent regarding filingthe claim !
Water damage is troublesome . If the water damage comes from the pipes carrying water inside the house , the damage is probably covered . If the damage comes from leaky plumbing or backed up sewer it is probably not covered . If the leaking is seepage through the wall , it is probably not covered . If the damage is the result of flooding it would be covered if you also had a flood policy .
Mold is in every home . Building materials provide the food necessary for mold to grow . Moisture is the ingredient necessary for mold to become a problem . Moisture , most commonly comes from leaking plumbing . Leaky plumbing is excluded in most homeowners policies . If the mold is the result of a sudden discharge from a pipe in the home , coverage might be available ; however , remediation normally eliminates that from happening .
A homeowners policy covers damage caused by a covered peril . The loss to a roof is covered when it is the result of a fire , for example . It is not covered if it is the result of age and deterioration as those arent covered perils . When a roof is adjusted for a damage loss , many companies treat a roof on a cash value basis . This is because the life of the roof is shorter than the life of the remainder of the building . So if a roof is half way through its life and suffers a covered loss , it is likely to be covered to 50 % of the cost of replacing the roof .
Keep in mind that your homeowners policy is not a maintenance policy . Similar to your auto insurance not providing coverage for new tires or new brakes , your homeowners insurance policy will not pay for a new roof if the roof is worn out and has just deteriorated over time . The life of a typical composition shingle roof is anywhere from 20 - 30 years and needs to be replaced if it is falling apart due to wear and tear . This is very different from a claim scenario where your roof sustains sudden and accidental damage from a storm -LRB- i.e. wind or hail -RRB- . If this is the case , your roof can be covered under your homeowners insurance and depending on the extent of the damage could potentially be covered for replacement . Everyone should consult their agent to check the language of the policy and weigh all options because when you submit a claim it is normal for your rates to go up because of a loss of discount and / or a rating surcharge . -- @MooneyInsurance
A homeowners policy covers damages caused by a named peril -LRB- i.e. fire . -RRB- Deterioration is rarely covered under a homeowners policy . The roof is a piece of the residence that is treated differently when it comes to a claim . Most companies do not replace a roof ; rather they pay for the actual cash value of the roof , or the depreciated value . If the roofing is the problem and it is not the result of a storm or something breaking it , then coverage isnt likely .
There are two parts to this question . Your homeowners policy will cover damage caused by a roof leak if it is the result of a named peril . You should read your policy or consult with your agent to determine if there is coverage . Frequently there is . The second part is the roof itself . If the roof leaked as a result of a named peril it could be a valid claim , however , many insurance companies do not replace a roof , rather they pay the actual cash value of the roof . That is the depreciated value of the roof .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover normal wear and tear of any kind , so if the roof is just old this is not a covered peril . Should the roof be damaged by a covered peril then the roof would either be repaired or replaced minus your deductible . A covered peril may include wind , hail , falling objects , fire to name a few .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Many People Own Life Insurance ?
This stats are taken from LIMRA : Thirty percent of U.S. households have no life insurance at all ; only 44 percent have individual life insurance . Fifty percent of U.S. households -LRB- 58 million -RRB- say they need more life insurance . The average amount of coverage for U.S. adults has declined to -LRB- 167,000 -RRB- , down $ 30,000 from the average coverage in 2004 . While 4 in 10 households with children under 18 now include a mother who is either the sole or primary earner for her family yet , among women who have life insurance , their coverage is only 69 percent of the average coverage on men .
Once upon a time there was a very rich man . He owned a number of businesses which he had started himself and which he had built himself . Altogether , he employed close to 20,000 people . That means he created opportunities for 20,000 people to support their families and lead their own lives . He understood that he could never have built his business empire without the dedication , hard work , and loyalty of each and every one of those men and women . He took good care of them . He paid them well . Lots of bonuses , lots of benefits . He was very community-minded . He knew that no man , and no family , was an island unto itself . We need each other . We need each other in times of natural disasters , and human tragedy , and family distress . When people lose their job , or get sick , or maybe lose their home , they need a helping hand . He always made sure his hand was ready to give . He took it upon himself to help many , many people . He gave generously to community service organizations . He made sure that families who were suffering had the means to weather the storm and remain together . When people in need came to him , he helped them get back on to their own two feet . He was an extremely dedicated family man . He loved his wife dearly . He was always there for his children . Everything he did was really for them . He wanted them to have the best of everything . He especially wanted his son and daughter to have a great jump-start in life . His entire estate the houses , the businesses , the valuables - was going to go to them when he passed away . One day he had a lunch meeting with his friend who was an estate planning attorney . His friend made the following observation : You know , you are quite a person . You have done such a tremendous job building a life for yourself . All the people you employ , all the people you help . How fortunate your family is to have you as a provider . But heres the problem : God forbid you die tomorrow , this entire wonderful world you have built collapses . Without you and your broad shoulders , the entire enterprise stops in its tracks . You can imagine that our friend the Rich Man didnt like hearing that at all . He had indeed put so much of himself into what he held to be precious . It would almost be an act of betrayal for them to lose it all when he died . I mean , shouldnt he make provisions for their care after his death ? Why shouldnt the show go on ? So many people have become dependent on him . So , he bought a bunch of life insurance . Life insurance to make sure his family wouldnt have to sell half his assets just to pay the governments estate tax bill . They wouldnt have to sell the residences or family jewels . The heirlooms could stay in the family . He bought life insurance to enable his businesses to keep running . People would be able to keep their jobs . Vendors would get paid . Clients would receive service . The management team would have enough money to keep going and growing . He bought life insurance to fill the coffers of charities doing noble work in his community . Hungry people could get fed . Homeless people could get shelter . Unemployed people get retrained for new jobs . Life insurance made it possible for the great work this man had been doing to continue . And because life insurance is such a great deal financially , the cost of this planning was literally pennies on the dollar . Each dollar of life insurance benefit literally cost him a few cents . Of course , it was this financial wisdom and eagerness to take advantage of a great deal that made him rich in the first place :-RRB- Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Jerry has provided you with a good summary of the provisions in your standard life insurance contract . I will share with you some additional info about one clause in particular : the suicide provision . I have actually handled claims due to suicide . You can imagine how extraordinary an experience that can be . Being there for people in their time of deep grief is hard enough . Getting involved with finances at the time requires great delicacy . And to do so when the cause of claim is suicide gives things an almost unreal quality . Most people have a really tough time dealing with death . When people take their own life , it makes things almost too hard to handle . Against this crazy backdrop , you have the added question as to whether or not the insurance company will pay the benefit . I am pleased to report that in the few cases I have had , the answer has been an unequivocal yes . One claim was actually pretty close to the two-year limit . As such , there was concern as to how tough a line the insurance company would draw . They are , after all , worried about insurance fraud and people trying to collect benefits illicitly . But this case was indeed tragic . It involved an elder gentleman who just was really sick and had had enough of life . So he settled things in his own way . The claim was paid without delay .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
Many people need life insurance . Studies show that many people know that they need life insurance . People who love someone else need life insurance to ease the pain of a premature death . People who owe money need life insurance to fulfill their obligations . People who are looking to the future need life insurance to protect their ability to obtain coverage . My favorite though , is wives need life insurance . They are so very important in a family and widowers have such a difficult time when they lose their wife .
Home Insurance is NOT compulsory ! If you own a home and are financially secure and independent of any contractual or mortgage obligations , whether you self insure or purchase homeowners insurance is totally an independent decision . Since the purpose of insurance is to spread one 's risk over a large pool of people having the same class of risk , it could be assumed that if one were to have a great sum of assets and wish to underwrite their own risk , in some cases , it may be an advisable task to take . For the average homeowner , a fire , wind , water damage or liability loss could mean absolute devastation and financial ruin . It is well noted in all regions of the country that many retired people choose to discontinue paying for home insurance after their mortgage is paid off , many times , these same people may begin to close an eye to necessary maintenance issues on the home thus causing a fire or jeopardizing the safety of the home to other perils ; many families have been devastated in the course of saving the cost of an inexpensive insurance premium .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the MOST favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the worst definition as you must meet more requirements than a true own occupation or modified own occupation to receive a benefit payout . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately with a true own occupation or modified own occupation policy or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own . This is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance companies are no different than any other business . They must price themselves to make a profit or they could not exist . Term Life insurance is the easiest to explain . They take in $ 400 per year in premiums for example . They only sell this policy to young healthy people at this price . IF you die while insured they will pay your beneficiary $ 250,000 . If very many people died , this would never work . The life insurance company has run the numbers and knows exactly how many people with that policy will die while insured . It 's very very few . Most people will pay that premium for 20-years and never receive anything back . The money a life insurance company collects in premiums minus what they pay in claims minus their operational costs = their profit .
This is more commonly known as a survivorship universal life -LRB- SUL -RRB- insurance policy - it 's different from an individual universal life insurance policy in that the policy insures the lives of two people -LRB- usually a husband and wife -RRB- . The policy proceeds are only paid out upon the death of the second insured . Many people use this type of policy for estate planning purposes . If your mother can not continue to make premium payments or does not want to , she can surrender the policy and take out the cash value -LRB- less any surrender charges , outstanding loans , or interest , if applicable -RRB- . There is also the option to let it run out on it 's own . When you no longer contribute premiums to the policy , it will steadily use up the cash value in the policy to continue the coverage until there is nothing left , at which the point the policy would `` crash '' on it 's own and no longer provide coverage . The third option is to change the structure of the policy . You may have the option to reduce the face amount of the policy -LRB- the death benefit -RRB- or reduce the length of coverage to lower the premiums to make the policy more affordable if cost is a concern . I would suggest your mother contact the agent on the policy and ask them to run midstreams to find out what the current values are on the policy , how long the coverage will go for on the guaranteed side and current assumption side of the program and what changes would it make to the policy given the above options . This will provide a good indication as to what course of action would be most appropriate . Guaranteed side means how long will the coverage be guaranteed for at the absolute minimum with a given program structure . Current assumption side means how long will the coverage go for given today 's values .
It depends . What is your specific situation - how many vehicles do you have , how many drivers are in your household ? Do any drivers have any tickets or accidents in the last 3 years ? Do you own a home and/or have other assets ? These are just a few of the questions that we 'll look to get answered to help us determine the best path for you.Please understand that there are several great auto insurance companies here in Texas ; every situation is unique and has it 's own factors that will determine how to proceed in securing the best autoinsurance coverage for your unique situation . I guess the best answer is which auto insurance company can best fit and satisfy your current situation and current needs?Give us a call at 469.206.8048 or you can e-mail me at WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your situation to get you the protection you need .
There are three main types of life insurance and they have three different intended lengths . Whole-Life Insurance - Designed to stay in force until you die regardless of how long you live . Most people pay a premium on whole-life their entire lifetime but many will pay it in full within 10-years or 20-years . Some pay it with one single premium . Term Life Insurance - Term is a policy that you decide how long yopu want to keep it when you buy it . Most people buy it for either 1-years , 20-years or 30-years . If you try to keep term life insurance too long you will pay a LOT of money to keep it going in the later years . That is usually the result of bad planning . Universal Life -LRB- aka : Flexable Premium Life -RRB- - You COULD keep this policy going for as long as you live but the premium will usually go up a lot unless you die at a younger age . You can change the amount of premium you pay with these policies since they do not have a lifetime rate guarantee . Many people consider these to be time-bomb policies if they are not reviewed and adjusted regularly .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Is Life Insurance More Expensive For Males ?
For some reason -LRB- scientist and sociologists will say for a number of reasons -RRB- , the life expectancy for females is longer than for males . Since life insurance premiums are based on actuarial tables and the probability of death at different ages , the cost of life insurance for males is more expensive than for females of the same age .
It has to do with mortality rates . Statistically , women live longer than men . My theory after 25 years of marriage is that women drive us to an early grave , but that is just my observation . Men do have a tendency to not see their doctors on a regular basis , take more physical risks and endure more occupational stress than our female counter parts . Buy life insurance and godspeed sir !
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
It depends on gender , age , smoking status and existing health conditions as well as medical history . Benefits can range from $ 5,000 to $ 50,000 Lump-Sum Cash Premium Payment . Here are some single lump sum premium estimates on nonsmoking male and females for a $ 50,000 benefit : Male Age 40 $ 710 - $ 750 Female $ 510 - $ 550 Male Age 45 $ 915 - $ 955 Female $ 665 - $ 715 Male Age 50 $ 1,165 - $ 1,199 Female $ 795 - $ 840 Male Age 55 $ 1,430 - $ 1,475 Female $ 920 - $ 960 Male Age 60 $ 1,665 - $ 1,715 Female $ 1,050 - $ 1,125
Life insurance rates for smokers may be less expensive than you realize ! Of course , as experienced brokers , our job is to shop , compare and find the lowest prices with the help of our top-rated websites and modern software . Nicotine use is one of the underwriting factors considered when determining rates . However , other factors , such as use of medications , existing conditions and height/weight will also factor in the determination of prices . A few general estimates from top-rated companies : -LRB- Rates are monthly for a healthy smoker...10-year guarantee -RRB- : $ 39 - $ 250,000 40 year old male $ 19 - $ 100,000 40 year old male $ 33 - $ 250,000 40 year old female $ 60 - $ 500,000 40 year old female $ 29 - $ 250,000 30 year old male ALSO ... $ 109.86 - $ 500,000 40 year old male 20-year guarantee
Auto Insurance premiums are based on several factors which include ; age , gender -LRB- males are generally more risky -RRB- , past driving history , the type of car and the coverage you have or are required to have on it -LRB- if you have a loan , they you will be required in most cases to be fully covered -RRB- , if you can `` bundle '' your coverage with other needs such as multi-car discount , your homeowners , etc. . Contact your agent to find out more specifics on why your insurance is expensive .
This is a rather ambiguous question because I am wondering as compared to whom ? I will assume that you mean as compared to a male of similar race and gender . Briefly , please do not take this answer as being racist or sexist , but premiums are based upon loss ratios , which are the results of actuarial studies based upon region , gender , race , age , and a million other details . Typically , women pay a slightly higher premium just because statistically more women make claims then men . Now this might be because more women are driving -LRB- i.e. more numerous claims -RRB- or because men drive more aggressively -LRB- i.e. causing more accidents -RRB- . Now , with this being said , women can shop around to obtain a cheaper premium . Moreover , women can take defensive driving courses and carry more liability insurance to obtain discounts at a later date . If a woman maximizes her discounts then her premium will be negligibly higher than a male of the same age and race . Sorry for the unfair answer .
That is an excellent question ! There are many factors that contribute to how the companies set their premium prices . The first thing to know is that insurers are all about the risk . The more risk that they will have to pay out , the higher your premium payment will be . Why ? because they do n't want to collect a couple of payments from you , and get stuck paying out a large sum . So your driving record will be the first thing . Your age and gender will be a factor . Young male drivers are higher risks than middle-aged mom 's , for example , so the young man will likely pay higher premiums than Mom will . What you are driving also plays a part , a sports car or expensive to repair vehicle will cost more than a gently used family car would . A new vehicle verses an older one , for the same reasons . Then there are things like your credit history , and where you live ; and the companies profit margin to consider . There can be more , but these are the big ones that you can count on as factors . I hope that answers your question , thank you for asking !
For some reason -LRB- scientist and sociologists will say for a number of reasons -RRB- , the life expectancy for females is longer than for males . Since life insurance premiums are based on actuarial tables and the probability of death at different ages , the cost of life insurance for males is more expensive than for females of the same age .
The price for term insurance will vary depending on the amount of coverage , the term -LRB- number of years -RRB- of the policy , where you live , certain health considerations , whether you smoke , etc.Below is my Facebook post from last Thursday , which will give you a sample . To get a specific quote , you should work with a Life Insurance Agent . Did you know ... a 30 y/o male can get $ 500,000 10-Yr Term Life Ins for $ 16/mo !? A 40 y/o male = $ 23/mo . A 50 y/o male = $ 46/mo . Old proverb : `` Anyone who dies without life insurance should be required to come back and clean up the mess . ''
Insurance companies base their pricing on mounds of historical data . They carefully review statistics common to the industry as well as those specific to that company 's loss experience . This risk analysis ultimately results in the rates we pay for the products that company offers . Over a great many years , statistics have tended to show that younger less experienced male drivers tend to be involved in more claims than their young , less experienced female counterparts . That being the case , and all other things being equal , it would cost more for a male to insure a car than it would for a female to insure the same car .
LIfe Insurance pricing is like going to the grocery store ; lots of different choices.It will depend on a variety of factors including ; 1 -RRB- Age - younger is less expensive2 -RRB- Health - good health is less expensive than health issues3 -RRB- Tobacco usage - non smoker is less expensive4 -RRB- Gender - Females tend to be less expensive than males at same age5 -RRB- Type - term insurance is less expensive the younger you are since its pure insurance . Some universal life policies can offer premium options that make it less expensive than whole lifeFind a company that can provide you a quote based on your circumstances and then compare various types of plans offered .
You should only be dealing with group underwriting if your group has more than 50 employees or you are considering a self-funded group health plan . The employees in your group will have to complete an application form and answer a variety of medical questions regarding various health conditions and prescription drug usage . These forms are then submitted for underwriting where an underwriter takes into consideration what health conditions exist in the group -LRB- diabetes , cancer , pregnancies , expensive maintenance drugs , etc. -RRB- and then makes a determination if the originally quoted rates for your group will generate enough premium to cover the average expected risk plus the now disclosed risks in your group . For example , if based on the census of your group the male to female ratio and average age in the group indicated a need for $ 20,000 per month in premium to cover the expected risk and overhead associated with your group you would start out with an proposal costing $ 240,000 annually . It is assumed there will be a certain average amount of health care consumption in your group based solely on the factors I 've described above . If , however , your group has risks in it that go beyond what is standardly assumed should exist -LRB- you have a large number of diabetics or some pregnancies in the pipleline or an ongoing cancer case for examples -RRB- then the underwriter will `` adjust '' the originally quoted rates to reflect the need for more premium to cover these higher than anticipated medical expenses . So , if the underwriter determines that your group is more likely to cost $ 300,000 in medical expenses and overhead rather than $ 220,000 as originally quoted , the underwriter will return a `` counter offer '' with a 36 % rate adjustment -LRB- $ 300K / $ 220K -RRB- to accept your group at its real risk level .
In California males do not pay more for auto insurance than females . However , in other states that might be a rating factor . Rating factors are determined by comparing the claims of males against females . If there is a significant difference the company can approach the insurance commissioner about including gender as a rating factor . In the end it is all about numbers . It is not because insurance companies prefer women over men .
Rates are n't that bad . But why not quit smoking ? 6 months off tobacco will save you loads of $ $ $ . For a 40 year old male , the very best rates we can get for you is : 20 Year , Non-Smoker $ 500K coverage $ 29.41 / month $ 340.00 / year 20 Year Smoker $ 500K coverage $ 125.43 / month $ 1,450.00 / year Not only do you save money if you do n't smoke . But the odds are you will outlive your life insurance , which should be your number one goal for your family .
Who sells the best whole life insurance ? Well in my many years as both a captive and independent I can answer truthfully , a lot of companies . The best thing about life insurance is that there are many companies that occupy that top of the table where best could apply to any of them . You may see from time to time , advertisements from companies showing they 're best for 250k coverage . What they put in small print would be male age 35 best possible class . Why ? because they may not be best for females age 30 standard plus class . The best place to be company wise will simply depend on who you are , how your health is , how much coverage you buy and do you smoke ? Your answers may make the best company be entirely different than somebody else like your spouse for example .
It is impossible to give you a specific answer to your question without knowing more information . Here are a couple of examples : For a male non-smoker age age 25 , $ 500,000 would be $ 25.65 a month for a 10 Year renewable term and with the same company a 45 year old male non-smoker would pay $ 47.25 a month . Thee are online quoting services you can use to give you a point of reference . An independent broker who deal with several companies can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
It will depend on a variety of factors including ; 1 -RRB- Age - the younger you are , the less expensive it is 2 -RRB- Tobacco use - smokers pay a higher premium than non smokers 3 -RRB- Gender - females tend to be less expensive than their male counterparts at the same age 4 -RRB- Past health - people in good health get better rates than those who have had health issues 5 -RRB- The company you choose - if you compare the same product with different companies you may get various prices . Cheaper is not always better so you need to shop . 6 -RRB- Finally , the type of insurance you choose will impact the price greatly . For younger people term insurance tends to be less expensive than whole life or universal life . Let an agent -LRB- like myself -RRB- give you a quote based on your particular circomstances so you can shop and compare .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
The payment for a $ 50,000 Life Insurance policy will vary greatly depending on age , health , and what type of policy it is -LRB- term or permanent -RRB- . A $ 50,000 Whole Life policy for a child may cost under $ 10/mo , while a $ 50,000 Whole Life policy for an 80 year old male who has some health conditions and smokes , could cost over $ 1,000 per month . A 30 year old male who had excellent health and does not smoke could get a term policy of $ 50,000 for under $ 10/mo and a guaranteed no lapse universal life policy for under $ 35/mo . You can use the quote engine on our website to get the prices for other ages and health and tobacco factors . PS I apologize ; I did not see the statement that you are a woman who is 74 years old until now . Assuming you have pretty good health , you could get a No Exam Whole Life policy of $ 25,000 for about $ 175,000 . Or you may be able to get a permanent policy of $ 50,000 for about that same price , by taking an exam . If you took $ 50,000 in Term insurance , you could possibly pay under $ 100/mo . Feel free to give me a call ; I can find your best rate very quickly and will make sure it is with a policy for which you qualify .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
Is It Worth Getting Critical Illness Insurance ?
If you have a critical illness in your future , and will have received a lump sum of money to get you through that process of treatment and -LRB- hopefully -RRB- recovery , you will have thought it is worth it . No one knows the future . To some , having the knowledge that such a benefit would be provided if they are diagnosed with a life threatening illness , is worth it . To others , that is not such a big deal . Whether it is worth getting critical illness insurance or not is really a person decision . That being said , there are many more survivors of critical illnesses now than in the past . So it is a risk worth considering .
There are two schools of thought here : 1 -RRB- . Have a quality health insurance plan in force and a long-term disability income policy . 2 -RRB- . Purchase good health insurance and supplemental critical illness plan . Option 2 will always be the less expensive of the two as a long term Disability Income policy is very expensive in most cases . Either way you go , if you have a stand-alone critical illness plan , you 'll be happy you had it if you have a major illness .
If you have a critical illness in your future , and will have received a lump sum of money to get you through that process of treatment and -LRB- hopefully -RRB- recovery , you will have thought it is worth it . No one knows the future . To some , having the knowledge that such a benefit would be provided if they are diagnosed with a life threatening illness , is worth it . To others , that is not such a big deal . Whether it is worth getting critical illness insurance or not is really a person decision . That being said , there are many more survivors of critical illnesses now than in the past . So it is a risk worth considering .
I have friends who have collected on critical illness insurance policies , and it definitely was worth it , to them . Insurance is protection against the unknown , so one never knows whether it will be worth it for you or not . If there are illnesses covered by critical illness policies that run in your family , the policy would most likely have more value to you than to a family that does not appear to carry risk for cancer , stroke , etc. .
Critical illness insurance can be a supplemental insurance to cover high medical insurance deductibles . But critical illness is worth looking into if your family has a history of hospitalization or a predisposition to disease or sickness . Many working seniors purchase critical illness as a defensive measure against unexpected medical bills that may not be covered under Medicare or their Medicare Supplement policies .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Right Peggy !! The `` death benefit '' inside a disability policy is usually limited to a few months worth of the `` Monthly Benefit '' . So if your benefit is $ 3,000 a month , then you might get 3 , 6 , maybe 9 thousand in a death benefit . LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE . Does it pay ONLY AFTER you have met an elimination period or is it an immediate benefit ? Disability is a very important plan to own . Yet , I know that buying life insurance , buying disability , buying long term care , buying critical illness , & then buying home , auto , umbrella , & more can be very overwhelming ... . You might consider buying a Living benefits & / or Hybrid Life insurance plan ... These are life insurance plans that you can use BEFORE you die . I have a massage therapist that owns a plan with a death benefit , a $ 30,000 critical illness benefit , and has a $ 1000 a month disability benefit . She pays about $ 43 month for all of this . PERFECT for single mom with a modest income . YES ... standalone Disability has more features and better terms ... yet the all in one plan allows her to cover a critical illness , a disability , & early death . Reach out with questions :--RRB- - gravy
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
The key to a critical illness plan is to get a good one . Sadly , most agents and even fewer consumers know the difference in a good critical illness policy and a poor one . Never buy on price alone , and shop around . This is one area where paying a little more is worth it . Make sure the policy is health insurance , not life insurance with a rider .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
Critical illness is not an investment , but insurance , a part of defensive financial planning . Is it worth the premiums to supplement your medical insurance plan ? It depends . Critical illness insurance should be a consideration if your family has genetic predisposition to disease , chronic conditions and/or a history of hospitalization .
In sports there are `` odds '' ... What are the odds of hitting a hole in one ? An average golfer on a 200-yard par-3 : 150,000 to 1 . Odds of myself or David/Ted -LRB- above -RRB- ... one in TWO ... Ladies are lucky ... it 's only 1 on 3 ... So yes , `` cancer insurance '' is a great protection plan to own . Let 's compare Cancer insurance to protection plan that is growing in popularity , Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- . Cancer insurance covers ?? ... . YES ... ding , ding , ding ... cancer . Most benefits are paid out on a scheduled basis . Meaning you get `` so much for each item eligible for a claim '' . Each treatment/service has a named value : Chemo - So much per treatment . Surgery - a specific amount . Hospital stay - A specific amount per day . Possibly more for ICU . & it goes on ... . Critical Illness pays a lump sum upon diagnosis . There is no need to continually update the carrier about treatments , surgeries , & hospital stays . Think of it as upfront money vs. trickling in over time . Since Critical Illness Insurance typically ahs a benefit for Cancer , heart attack/stroke , and other life changing illnesses -LRB- like blindness & paralysis -RRB- , the one policy can do a lot more for you over a lifetime . Which is better , Cancer or Critical Illness insurance ? As you will see in many of my posts ... UNDERWRITING is the key . Always buy the most coverage for your monthly premium dollars based on the underwriting . - gravy
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is American Income Life Insurance Legitimate ?
Yes . American Income Life Insurance is a legitimate company . They have been around for a while . I heard about them approximately 8 years ago when they attempted to recruit me as a life insurance agent . You can also enter their name into your favorite search engine to find out more information about the company .
Disability insurance is extremely important . The street vernacular calls disability insurance paycheck protection . With most Americans have less than 90 days of reserve cash for expenses , it important to buy as to the maximum limits . The first step is to determine your legitimate earnings to establish your compensation . Then you have an important decision to make : pay the premium after tax for a tax free benefit of up to 60 % of your compensation or pay the premium pretax for a taxable benefit up to 80 % of your compensation , provided that you have ability to use the premium as a legitimate business deduction . Depending upon your gender , age , nonsmoking status and good health condition you should be ready to pay 5 to 8 % of your compensation .
Yes . American Income Life Insurance is a legitimate company . They have been around for a while . I heard about them approximately 8 years ago when they attempted to recruit me as a life insurance agent . You can also enter their name into your favorite search engine to find out more information about the company .
Gerber Life is a `` legitimate '' life insurance company in that it is domiciled in the state of NY and is located at 1311 Mamaroneck Ave. , White Plains , NY , 10605 , 914272-4000 , and is licensed to do business in all 50 states and Canada . They list six product groups on their website , WEBSITELINK , includingthe onlyendowment life policy that is also an adult life insurance policy . It 's called the Gerber Life College Plan and has been their flagship policy for a long time . They are definitely a niche carrier , targeting the parent and grandparent market . Their contracts have many guaranteed features that appeal to those that do n't want to take any chances that their insurance might lapse or diminish in value over time . I have worked with their service teams on a few occasions and they are knowledgeable and very customer-oriented . The have been rated `` A '' , AM Best 's third-highest financial rating , and `` A - '' by Weiss , which is their 3rd best rating as well . Both of those ratings are within the `` Excellent '' range of both rating services . That gives them a Comdex of `` 80 '' , which means that 80 % of all financially-rated carriers are ranked below them . If by `` legitimate '' you are referring to their contracts being of real value , or if can you trust a life insurance company that is also a baby food company , you may want to do more research . From and industry point of view , they are legitimate .
Self-employed people need to verify income . Generally , the disability insurance company is looking for two years of tax returns , bank net worth statements from loan applications and sometimes bank account records that establish revenue . The first step is to determine your legitimate earnings to establish your compensation . Then you have an important decision to make : pay the premium after tax for a tax free benefit of up to 60 % of your compensation or pay the premium pretax for a taxable benefit up to 80 % of your compensation , provided that you have ability to use the premium as a legitimate business deduction . Depending upon your gender , age , nonsmoking status and good health condition you should be ready to pay 5 to 8 % of your compensation .
The cost of disability insurance is dependent on gender , age , smoking status and health condition . The first step is to determine your legitimate earnings to establish your compensation . Then you have an important decision to make : pay the premium after tax for a tax free benefit of up to 60 % of your compensation or pay the premium pretax for a taxable benefit up to 80 % of your compensation , provided that you have ability to use the premium as a legitimate business deduction . Depending upon your gender , age , nonsmoking status and good health condition you should be ready to pay 5 to 8 % of your compensation .
The first step is to determine your legitimate earnings to establish your compensation . Then you have an important decision to make : pay the premium after tax for a tax free benefit of up to 60 % of your compensation or pay the premium pretax for a taxable benefit up to 80 % of your compensation , provided that you have ability to use the premium as a legitimate business deduction . Depending upon your gender , age , nonsmoking status and good health condition you should be ready to pay 5 to 8 % of your compensation .
In scenarios where executive benefits are a recruiting and retention feature of the company , disability insurance can be a significant key person employee perk . The disability insurance premium can be expensed as a legitimate tax deduction to the company . But if benefits are generated to the executive , the income is taxed as oridanry income at the executive 's effective tax bracket .
Bank owned life insurance -LRB- BOLI -RRB- allows banks to obtain better after tax return on assets than tier 1 capital . The bank is owner and beneficiary of the life insurance , not bank executives . Regulations have tightened in recent years and banks must have a legitimate reason to own life insurance on the lives of highly compensated executives of the bank . BOLI is usually set up to informally fund nonqualified benefit plans for selected executives . The executive is an insured in these policies but has no ownership interest . The executive 's family not a beneficiary of the policy though the nonqualified benefit agreements may have death benefit provisions which are income taxable to them unlike a life insurance policy death benefit . Though not BOLI , split dollar arrangements have reemerged which can overcome most BOLI shortcomings and allow both the bank and the executive to directly participate in and benefit from a life insurance contract .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Disability Insurance Premiums can be tax deductible , if you have a legitimate business and you wish to expense the disability insurance premiums . Keep in mind that once you deduct the disability insurance premium , the benefits will be taxable as ordinary income . Another advantage of expensing disability insurance is you can cover up to 80 % of your compensation .
Anyone can own their own life insurance policy , when they are the insured person in the policy . Sometimes people think that someone else should own their life insurance policy for tax purposes , when the possibility of their estate ever being large enough to incur estate taxes is nil , and life insurance does not incur income taxes . But there are legitimate situations -LRB- for tax purposes and otherwise -RRB- where another person owning the policy is wise . To own the policy , that person must have a financial interest in the life of the insured person . It is the owner of the policy who has the right to change the beneficiary . So be careful when choosing an owner .
The number of life insurance policies is n't a concern except for the fact that consolidation of multiple policies can generally save you money . The real concern is why multiple policies ? One life insurance policy could cover the domestic financial liabilities , another to fund tax advantaged retirement income and still another could be for estate planning purposes . So you can have multiple polices for legitimate reasons .
If you have a legitimate business , that expenses operation costs , you may qualify for a deduction for disability insurance premiums . And tax deductible disability insurance allows for the purchase a greater benefit than nondeductible disability premium . However , tax deductible disability insurance benefits are taxable at ordinary income tax rates .
Some financial planners recommend spending no more than 1-3 % of your income on Disability Insurance . The cost of Disability Insurance does depend on your age and health , though , and those who are older or have signs of worsening health may have a legitimate need to spend more than the recommended amount .
If you have a legitimate business with operational expenses you may qualify for a tax deduction . If disability insurance is taken as a tax deduction you may be able to increase the benefits to 80 % of your compensation . But keep in mind that those benefits will be taxed as ordinary income .
Yes , Group Long Term Care Insurance is subject to ERISA , the Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . As Baby Boomers age and more long term care policies are being used , ERISA will come into play more and more in deciding what is a legitimate long term care claim .
If youre a legitimate business and you expensed or deducted the disability premium , then disability benefits are taxable at ordinary income tax rates . If there was no business deduction , then disability benefits are distributed tax free . Before deciding if the deduction makes sense determine your effective tax rate first .
When youre self-employed or a managing member of an LLC , youll need a paper trail of documentation for any legitimate benefits you want to expense . In this case , youll draft a disability document or your attorney , spelling out the benefit arrangement . Keep in mind that if you do deduct the disability premium , the benefits will be taxable as ordinary income .
Insurable Interest in Life Insurance is necessary . If there is no financial exposure from the policy insured to the policy beneficiaries , the life insurance company will decline the applications . Family members , charities , business partners or key business employees can be legitimate beneficiaries of a life insurance policy .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Does Obamacare Hurt Medicare ?
That is a great question ! There is an awful lot of misinformation , political manipulation , and muddying of the facts , so it 's really hard to see exactly what is going on . There are some good and bad things that the ACA does with its association with Medicare , and I 'll let you decide which is which . First off is you do not have any changes to your current plan , nor is it even legal for someone to tell you that you have to drop your current plan and try to enroll youin the marketplace . All current plans are grandfathered . One thing the ACA does is close the `` donut hole '' in coverage in Medicare part D . It will eventually phase out the patient cost until it becomes just the usual co-pay , increasing the likelihood that seniors will be able to afford their medications . It also expands coverage by making checkups and wellness visits -LRB- preventative care -RRB- not subject to deductible or co-pays . It does have cuts of $ 716 billion to the Medicare , mostly in the MedicareAdvantage plans that are run by private insurers . We are told that those cuts are to come from reduction in fraud , provider overpayments , and administration overhead . We are also told that the money from those cuts are being reinvested into the Medicare system , and that those reinvestments are expected to keep Medicare 's trust fund solvent until 2029 , an extra 12 years . It will also make cuts to hospitals that have higher return rates of patients by cutting the Medicare payments to those hospitals that are providing the least quality care . -LRB- Interestingly enough , that was a lead story on our news channel tonight , measuring the number of patients who returned to their hospital after treatment for infections that they got while in the hospital before their release . -RRB- Those are the bare bones of what the effects are supposed to be . How it will actually play out is anyone 's guess . Thanks for asking !
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
That is an excellent question !! Medicare is managed by a department of the Federal Government called the CMS - the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . It falls under the wing of the Department of Health and Human Services , and it manages the trust funds that fuel Medicare and Medicaid . There are two trust funds - one that is funded by payroll taxes , and by other taxes , investments , and earned interest . The other one is funded by Congress , premiums paid on Medicare B and D , investments and interest earned . Congressional cuts to the programs have hurt one fund , and the one that is funded by the payroll taxes is in danger of becoming underfunded within the next 20 years -LRB- 2029 , last estimate , with the additional funds culled from excesses in the program recaptured by the Affordable Care Act , AKA Obamacare - without them , 2024 -RRB- because the workforce is steadily shrinking -LRB- less collected tax -RRB- as the number of senior citizens eligible for Medicare and Medicaid increases -LRB- approximately 10,000 people turn 65 daily -RRB- . It does n't help that the Government in the past has raided the Social Security and Medicare trusts to fund other things that they felt were more important . I hope that that answers your question , if you would like more detail give me a buzz , and I 'll give you more . Thank you for asking !
I like to look at this question a little differently . There are basically three parts to your auto insurance policy . One part covers you if you hurt somebody -LRB- or something -RRB- . A second part covers you and your family if someone hurts you and does n't have any insurance or not enough to reimburse you for your injuries/suffering/lost earnings . A third part covers the car you may be driving should it be damaged . How much coverage would you expect someone to have if they hurt you or a family member ? That is a good guide for how much liability coverage you should consider . Your liability limit for others and uninsured/under-insured motorists limit for you should be consistent . If someone or something damaged your car , would you want to be reimbursed ? If so , your auto insurance should include comprehensive and collision coverage . Older fully paid car ? Still may be worth several thousand dollars and well worth insuring . It 's better to have a higher deductible than no coverage at all . If your insurance coverage meets these tests , this may be the best insurance coverage for you . Then I like to consider insurers who will also provide my homeowner 's / tenant 's coverage through a respected local agent with reasonably competitive premiums .
That is a great question ! The best place to start is at the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- site , WEBSITELINK once open enrollment reopens . The Act allows for subsidies for those who qualify -LRB- and a great many do -RRB- for helping with the expense of the health care coverage . The discounts can be very steep , and those subsidies may not be available through a private insurer . It never hurts to shop around first , so you have something to compare . Thank you for asking !
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
Your state might require that you carry insurance . However , common sense would indicate that someone can get hurt on a snowmobile and that a snowmobile can hurt other people . A snowmobile could also destroy property . So , you could be hurt , your snowmobile could be damaged and you could be sued . It seems to me those are good reasons to carry insurance .
Disability mortgage insurance is traditionally a payment provision to a mortgage loan that pays the monthly payment when due if the borrower who opts to have the coverage is sick or hurt and unable to work under the provisions of the coverage . Alternatively , some people can purchase specific products that cover mortgage payments , or at least make the amount of the mortgage payment available as a disability income benefit , if the insured become sick or hurt and is unable to hurt . This coverage is bought to ensure that mortgage payments are paid when the borrower can not work to earn money to pay the mortgage .
Yes , it will cover anyone hurt on your property if you are sued . That being said , you should make sure that anyone who does work on your property has there own insurance . A reputable contractor usually is covered by workman 's compensation if his employees are hurt while on the job .
Everyone . Actually anyone that is concerned about how they would handle paying the bills and daily living expenses if they were hurt or disabled . Disability insurance can help provide for you and your family when you need it most , when you are hurt and unable to work . Please contact a local agent to find out what coverage and exclusions there may be with the policies that he/she has to offer .
why do doctors hate Medicare ? Mainly because Medicare payment rates to doctors are below what it costs them to run their office and procedures . So seeing too many Medicare patients can hurt a doctor 's practice . That is why so many limit how many Medicare patients they will see without supplement plans to accompany the Medicare coverage .
If it has not already , it eventually will unless there are further delays or changes to the Affordable Care Act . Granted , those who have plans that were in place before the passage of the law on March 23 , 2010 can technically keep these policies in effect . That assumes your insurance carrier does n't phase out such policies and that you make essentially no changes to the policy . You may recall there was quite a national uproar over this issue late in 2013 that prompted President Obama to kind of have to live up to his `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' promise so we have seen more renewal offers of existing pre-Obamacare policies since then in the individual and small group marketplaces . And this does kind of trap these policyholders . ObanaCare compliant policies are generally significantly more expensive than their pre-Obamacare counterparts . So , you can experience some pretty significant rate increases on your old policy in some cases and still be marginally better off financially than moving to an ObamaCare compliant policy . I am certainly seeing this scenario play out in some cases . For ObamaCare to have any vague chance of working financially they really need to pull as many people as possible into their pool . Continuing to allow the existence of non-compliant policies denies them this revenue stream and probably a healthier population that chooses to maintain such policies . So , regardless of the promises of politicians , consumers need to be vigilant if they have an old style policy that they want to keep . The pressure will continue to build to save you people who do n't know better from your `` trash '' policies as the administration referred to them and to move you into the glorious world of ObamaCare .
How important is disability insurance ? How important is the ability to pay your bills if you get sick or hurt and ca n't work ? A person who has passive income to such a degree that work is optional really does n't need disability . While another person , especially one with little to no savings or reserves NEEDS something like a disability policy to cover that risk .
On average $ 10-15 per month , however , that doesnt even indicate how much it might cost you . Your location , loss experience and policy limits could vary a great deal from average . The better question is , How much can you pay in damages if someone is hurt in your unit , or if everything goes up in smoke , how will you get the money to start over ?
I would say no not everyone needs disability insurance it would depend on how well you handled your finances in the past it would not hurt to have it but does the numbers add up ? In my opinion if you have strong investments it could be a waste but if you do n't then you would need the insurance if you lost the ability to work your occupation . One of the most important factors to ask yourself is do the numbers add up what does your savings account balance look like that will determine in most cases if you need it or not or if you can afford it this is a very good question to ask the numbers must not be fake .
This is a somewhat subjective question . There is debate in both directions on whether or not the exchange will hurt small businesses . For most cases , the exchange will likely increase the cost of offering health insurance , and based on this increase in expense , one could argue that this increase could hurt small businesses .
Since you are a renter and do not own the property I assume by pool you mean liability in the even someone gets hurt or drowns . In this case the liability portion of your renters policy will cover you -LRB- assuming you were found negligent -RRB- up to the policy limits should a guest be hurt in the pool of the home or place you are renting . Even if you are not negligent the policy will still defend .
First of all in most states it is mandatory and you can lose your license if you do not have insurance . It is also a protection for you against lawsuits . Non of us plan on being in an at fault accident and hurting or killing someone . If someone is hurt or killed they or their family are entitled to compensation . Car insurance can help provide at least some compensation for medical bills and loss of income for the innocent party .
Buy whole life insurance when it hurts just a little bit . After a period of time that hurt will go away and you will be patting yourself on the back for your long sightedness . Dont think that you need all of your life insurance to be in a single policy . While there might be incremental savings in that approach it could lead to unnecessary and expensive delays . Senior citizens will tell you that they wished that they had bought more whole life and bought it earlier . They seldom say that they have too much insurance and would often like to purchase more but can not because of health and age .
Is Disability insurance worth it ? That is a question that can only be answered by the individual and what is valuable to them . Some people would rather pay for extra features on their cell phone plan than make sure they 've protected their paycheck from them getting sick or hurt off the job . I mean nobody gets hurt away from work ??? The worth of insurance is up to the person who choses it or decides not to . They 're the ones who live with the result .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What State Does Not Need Auto Insurance ?
As far as I know every state requires auto insurance . Why would you not want auto insurance is a better question ? In PA you are requires to 15/30 for BI , 5 in PD , 5 in Med , but there is no reason you should have coverage that low . For a few dollars more you can have solid coverage and it 's not worth risking everything you on over an accident .
I really do n't know the answer to this question , as I believe that every person who owns and drives a car needs auto insurance . Just think for a moment , if you did n't own auto insurance and you driving a car down a city street , when the car in front of you stops suddenly , you jerk your steering wheel to the side and manage to miss the car in front of you . You open your eyes and look at yourself and see that the airbags protected you and you were not injured ... but you find that you ran head long into the corner liquor store and end up in the middle of the scotch section , having destroyed most of the owners inventory . How would you pay for that ? Savings retirement , income will all be gone , as well as maybe your house and any other property you might own , not to mention your car is toast . This is the reason you need auto insurance , as it protects your finances now and in the future
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
I am assuming your are referring to the `` Comprehensive '' coverage - also called Other Than Collision - found in an auto insurance policy . State Auto is what we call a `` Super '' regional carrier as they are not nationwide , but are in more than a couple regional states . While the basic structure of the auto policy contract is the same company wide , they do tweak their contract based on state laws and state performance ratios . That being said , generally speaking State Auto 's comp coverage would include things like - fire , theft , water damage , glass damage , break-ins and hitting an animal like a deer . Comprehensive claims are subject to the deductible listed on your policy . Give your local State Auto independent agent a call and discuss the specifics of your state and policy language .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
USAA is a very good and large insurer that operates as an auto insurer and as such may be higher or lower than a competitor . A few years ago my daughter moved from USAA to another independent agency company and was able to buy a renters policy , and auto policy and an umbrella all for less than her USAA auto policy . All auto insurance is regulated by individual states , so you can expect that an usurer can reflect its appetite for auto insurance in that state in its pricing . No company can be the least expensive in every state for every set of conditions . That is not a realistic expectation . You should be aware too that insurers often build elaborate rating algorithms which can produce several million price points across their business in a particular state . So your carrier may believe that a 16 year old with Corvette is not insurable to that carrier while another insurer might say the exposure is fine since they are exacting what they consider an adequate rate for the exposure .
The federal govt . does not require auto insurance . Auto insurance is regulated at the state level . With the exception of the state of New Hampshire , every state has at least a state minimum liability coverage requirement . Some states also require medical coverage -LRB- aka PIP -RRB- , and some states require uninsured motorist coverage as well .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
In Wisconsin you are required to have auto insurance by law . There are several states that do require auto insurance . If you are caught driving in a state that does require auto insurance you will more than likely be fined and receive a ding on your MVR . Please contact a local agent to get more on the state laws in your area .
An SR22 is n't insurance . It is a state filing that attaches onto an auto insurance policy . an sr22 is a guarantee that you are carrying at least the state minimum auto insurance liability coverage . thus the cost of an sr22 can vary greatly , because it is highly dependent of your auto insurance rate . Things such as what vehicle you are driving , what coverages you need , your driving record , your age , and other things all go into that rating .
In almost all states within the United States , if you are pulled over by the police and found to not have any auto insurance coverage you will be fined , possibly have your license suspended or revokedand possibly receive jail time . Please remember every state set its own regulations for auto insurance . To find out your states regulations for auto insurance , I would recommend contacting the department of motor vehicles or your state 's commisioner of insurance office .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
An auto isnurance policy is made up of several different coverages which cover a variety of things . Keep in mind insurance is also State specific , so the specific coverages that make up an auto policy can vary from state to state . In my state -LRB- TN -RRB- , the typical policy is made up of ; Liability - pays to the injuries or others subject to your policy limits Property Damage - Pays to fix damaged property of other subject to your policy limits Medical Payments - paid to you or your passengers subject to the policy limits Uninsured/underinsured motorist - covers you if another does n't have any or enough insurance subject to policy limits Comprehensive - subject tothe policydeductible , covers things like fire , theft , water , glass or collision with an animal . Collision - subject to a policy deductible covers damage to your car when the accident is your fault . There are other coverages like rental car expence , towing , etc. that can be added to a policy . The above is a very brief overview . Check out WEBSITELINK for a pretty indepth explanation of an auto insurance policy . It is also best to speak with a local independent agent in your area and ask them about speciifcs for your state and your personal needs .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Drive Without Car Insurance In Colorado ?
Driving without car insurance in not a smart idea . Colorado requires drivers to carry insurance limits of $ 25,000 per per person , $ 50,000 per accident for bodily injury , and $ 15,000 per occurrence of property damage liability . If you get caught driving without insurance , the police can arrest you and impound your car . The court can impose additional fines and requirements , or restrict your ability to drive . Contact a local agent to discuss your auto insurance needs . If you can not afford full coverage , let them know that . It is better to have the state minimum requirements and be able to pay for the coverage , then no coverage at all . Let us know if their is anything we can assist you with !
Driving without car insurance in not a smart idea . Colorado requires drivers to carry insurance limits of $ 25,000 per per person , $ 50,000 per accident for bodily injury , and $ 15,000 per occurrence of property damage liability . If you get caught driving without insurance , the police can arrest you and impound your car . The court can impose additional fines and requirements , or restrict your ability to drive . Contact a local agent to discuss your auto insurance needs . If you can not afford full coverage , let them know that . It is better to have the state minimum requirements and be able to pay for the coverage , then no coverage at all . Let us know if their is anything we can assist you with !
Auto insurance is required to register your can and to legally drive in Colorado . If you are caught driving without proof of insurance , the fines are extensive -LRB- as shown in Colorado Statute 42-4-1409 -RRB- : Four points against your driver license . First offense : minimum $ 500 fine , and license suspension until you can show proof to the Division of Motor Vehicles that you are insured . Second offense : minimum $ 1,000 fine and license suspension for four months . Third and subsequent offenses : minimum $ 1,000 fine and license suspension for eight months . Courts may add up to 40 hours community service to the above penalties .
The premiums for life insurance in Colorado vary widely . Age is big factor , as a younger person can get a policy at just a fraction of what a senior person would pay . Gender , health , tobacco , driving record , substance abuse , and dangerous hobbies or travel all affect the price . Then add to that the fact that shorter guarantees contribute to a lower price , and it truly is impossible to answer this question without more information . To find the cost of a Term life insurance policy in Colorado , you can go to a website that offers instant quotes and input different criteria . That will give you an idea of what prices are .
Every state is a bit different however In Colorado , where I am located , car insurance is mandatory for all drivers . Auto insurance is enforced by the Colorado Department of Regulatory Agencies which is part of the Department of Insurance . Colorado was a no-fault state until 2003 , when they changed the regulations to what is referrd to as TORT meaning fault has to be established first before claims will be paid .
Medicare does not cover dental care in Colorado , as a rule . Only if the oral care is needed to treat another general health condition , or to prepare the mouth for treatments involved in treating another general health condition , is dental treatment covered by Medicare in Colorado or the other 49 states .
The cheapest long term care insurance company in Colorado varies according to the person who is applying . Some companies are better at older ages ; some are better for couples . Some are better for -LRB- or are the only ones that will take -RRB- certain health conditions . Some offers certain features at a lower price than others . To find the cheapest long term care insurance for you , contact an agency that sells a variety of long term care companies in Colorado and review your health and all the features offered with a knowledgeable agent . Together , you can work out which has the lowest price for what you qualify for and what you need .
To answer this question on how much do agents make in Colorado i would like to recognize the opportunity you have . We all know it depends on how hard you work but the key is to become a master marketer . Colorado has many opportunities with small businesses , families and individuals . The retirement niche is a growing market with a lot of opportunity . Contact a local marketing organization like to get more details .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
To find out where to purchase Critical Illness Insurance in Colorado , you can search for an agency that sells Health Insurance , and they should be able to help you . Many other agencies carry Critical Illness Insurance as a product to round out their offerings of Life , Disability , and Long Term Care Insurance . When you find a good agency and a helpful agent , they can guide you to the best policy for your situation .
Seniors in Colorado can get a dental plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement plan to cover dental related expenses . Some plans even have dental , vision and hearing all in one plan . A good plan would give immediate coverage for dental exams , cleanings , extractions and fillings . Some plans do not have a network so you can go to any dentist you like .
Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- does not vary by state . Plan F in Florida is the same as a Plan F in Colorado . However , the monthly premium can be different from state to state . Medicare Advantage Plans can vary by state because of the network , etc. . The plans are based on which county you live in and different counties have different plans .
Colorado as a state does not require you to have renters insurance . However , many apartments & homes alike which are available to rent may require you to have renters insurance . This kind of insurance is very affordable and is recommended for everyone who rents . Be sure to look at the policy however . I would recommend getting the insurance which gives you replacement value vs. current value . Will cost you a little more but well worth it .
The cost of health insurance for a family can vary depending on the plan you choose , the state you live in various other factors such as age and smoking status . The quickest way to find out what health insurance costs for a family would be to go to a website for an independent agent that will let you run a quote or you can call us . Our website allows people to be review plans from all the major carriers in under 60 seconds . Click `` other '' on our website to go the the page to run a quote for a family . You can also give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 . We have helped many clients in Texas , Florida , Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina , Michigan and Colorado find a great health insurance plan for their family .
Medigap Plans will vary in cost depending on your age , smoking status and the state that you live in . It will also depend on which Plan you go with . Some plans can range between $ 100 - $ 200 per month in states like South Carolina , North Carolina , Colorado , Texas , Michigan and Georgia . However , premiums in Southern Florida are generally higher than in other areas of Florida . The amount of co-insurance , deductibles and co-pays you can save by having a Medigap Plan makes it a very easy decision to make . You can get more information on our website about what the different Medigap Plans would cost . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
Life insurance in Colorado that is left to a beneficiary who is a person , and not the estate , is protected from creditors . Once it goes to the beneficiary , the only creditors that can try to get it are those the beneficiary owes money to , not who the deceased insured person owed money to .
Life Insurance rates in Colorado will in most cases be the same in any other states . The rates or premiums as they are referred to are determined by a number of factors including you age , if you smoke or not , what if any health issues do you have ? , If there are health concerns , how well are you managing them ie . are you following your doctors directions with the required follow up ? The amount of coverage will also affect the rates as well as if you are looking at a term or permanent coverage . Contact your local broker to get more specific rates for your specific situation .
The average cost of Medigap Insurance will depend on your age , what state you live in , your smoking status and which Medigap Insurance Plan you have . Medigap Plans can range between $ 75 per month to $ 500 per month depending on those factors . The average cost of Medigap Insurance will be different in different states . For example , Texas , South Carolina , North Carolina and Colorado are usually less expensive than South Florida . However , North Florida will generally be less expensive than South Florida . Work with an independent agent to shop the market for you and find you the best plan for the least amount of premium that matches your specific needs . For more information you can visit our website or give me a call . I would be happy to answer any questions for you .
Medicare Region C includes the states Alabama , Arkansas , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi , New Mexico , North Carolina , Oklahoma , South Carolina , Tennessee , Texas , Virginia , West Virginia , Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands . This and other regions are designated for the purpose of supplying Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- for Medicare .
As in every other state , the amount of money that a life insurance agent makes in Colorado depends on how hard they work , how business savvy they are , whether they have gotten some good breaks , and all kinds of other factors . Many life insurance agents quit the first year due to the inability to make a living off of their income . Others go on to make over $ 100,000 per year .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does The Average Person Pay For Life Insurance ?
The cost of Life insurance is dependent upon your health , vocation , smoking status and coverage period of your Survivor 's need for cash upon your death . Term plans are very inexpensive because very few insureds die during the coverage period . Permanent plans are more expensive because 100 % of the Surviving beneficiaries will receive its death benefit . Company Actuaries determine the rates for coverages using statistical information matching risk of death of an insured during the coverage period of the plan .
If there is an average I would have to say most people have around $ 80 per month in life insurance . But there is no real tracking of an average that I know of . Some have $ 20 and many pay several thousand dollars per month for life insurance . The important thing is to do a fact finder and see how much you need and what kind . Then see if that will fit in your budget .
How much does the average person pay for life insurance ? Based on my 32 years in the business as a broker -LRB- and there is no right or best answer -RRB- , I would estimate between $ 15 and $ 150 per month . This is , of course , `` per person . '' Term policies are much cheaper than permanent policies and of course that would impact the amount each person pays . And ... each person has different amounts of coverage they carry . You can purchase term coverage for under $ 100 per year depending on age and face amount . But because of economies of scale , that may not be such a good idea . You may be able to double the coverage for slightly more . Quite simply , there will be tremendous variations in the amount that consumers pay for their coverage . A fully-licensed -LRB- full-time -RRB- broker will help you find the lowest prices .
Life insurance premiums are priced by gender , health condition , smoking status , amount of death benefit and the length in time of coverage . Male and female that are 25 years old and in super preferred health can pay $ 75 - $ 85 a year for ten year term life insurance for $ 100,000 worth of coverage .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The average cost of auto insurance per year is going to vary from state to state and more specifically , person to person . Almost all -LRB- if not all -RRB- insurance companies look at an individuals credit score , among other factors , to determine their ` insurance score ' . If you have a lower insurance score , your premium will be lower and visa versa . It 's very difficult to determine the average without factoring in credit , state , year-make-model of car , how much you drive , and your experience level among a host of other attributes . The state of Oklahoma for example is on average , much higher than the state of Missouri . One of the biggest reasons is due to natural risk , or geographic risk . IE ... more storms in Oklahoma Vs. Missouri . I 'm sure a simple google search would provide an average vs all states and credit scores . Although I would be skeptical of that number generated due to all the variances that determine the price .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much a specific individual should be paying for health insurance is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much renters insurance premiums depend on how much coverage you actually would like to carry on your personal items and how much liability protection you would like to obtain . Rates can run as low as 100.00 - 300.00 per year on average . I recommend you consult a local independent agent and discuss your personal needs .
On average $ 10-15 per month , however , that doesnt even indicate how much it might cost you . Your location , loss experience and policy limits could vary a great deal from average . The better question is , How much can you pay in damages if someone is hurt in your unit , or if everything goes up in smoke , how will you get the money to start over ?
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
Who is the average person and how much of their compensation does average person want to protect ? Long term disability insurance is paycheck insurance . First determine if your tax bracket warrants deducting the disability insurance premium as a legitimate business . If the answer is yes , apply for 80 % of your compensation . Keep in mind that the benefits will be taxable as ordinary income . If the answer is no , apply for 60 % of your compensation , your benefits will be tax free . Whats the cost ? Whats your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition ? Whats the amount you want to cover ? How long do you want coverage to last ? What elimination period do you require based on your current cash reserves ? It is possible that you may pay between 3-5 % of the compensation youre attempting to indemnify .
How much does the average person pay for life insurance ? Based on my 32 years in the business as a broker -LRB- and there is no right or best answer -RRB- , I would estimate between $ 15 and $ 150 per month . This is , of course , `` per person . '' Term policies are much cheaper than permanent policies and of course that would impact the amount each person pays . And ... each person has different amounts of coverage they carry . You can purchase term coverage for under $ 100 per year depending on age and face amount . But because of economies of scale , that may not be such a good idea . You may be able to double the coverage for slightly more . Quite simply , there will be tremendous variations in the amount that consumers pay for their coverage . A fully-licensed -LRB- full-time -RRB- broker will help you find the lowest prices .
To figure out how much life insurance you need with kids , you can make a little worksheet . Put down how much your family spends on average each year , and subtract your spouse 's salary from that . The difference is what you need to cover . Multiple it by how many years until your children are adults . Throw in extra for college . That is how much life insurance you may want to purchase .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Does Geico Offer Disability Insurance ?
No , Geico does not offer Disability Insurance . To obtain a Disability Insurance quote , contact a Life Insurance or Disability Insurance office or website that can shop several companies to find your best quote . Long Term Disability Insurance is offered through a number of companies , and these agencies can help you find the one that has your most affordable option .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Geico does not actually insure Renters or Homeowners . Geico partners with other insurance companies like Travelers and ASI who provide the insurance . Geico claims to cut out the middle man but that 's simply not true . Geico is an independent agency just like every local agency in your community . Geico just spends a tremendous amount of money to convince the public they are the cheapest and the best . It 's simple not true .
Geico does not sell life insurance originated within their own company . If you attempt to get a life insurance quote from Geico 's website it will take you to another agency . Geico says on their website that life insurance policies are written through non affiliated companies and secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. .
Geico offers Term Life Insurance through non-affiliated insurance companies . In other words , the life insurance is not underwritten by Geico ; Geico just helps you get it by referring you to a brokerage that carries quotes from multiple life insurance companies . The agency they refer you to is not owned by Geico .
Geico does not write Homeowners insurance . If you have your Auto insurance with Geico , they will typically offer you a Homeowners quote through Geico General Agency and the insurance company they use is Travelers Ins . Co. . They do this so that you can receive a Multi-policy discount . I hope this answered your question .
In answer to your question here , unless someone has knowledge to the contrary , Geico backs Geico homeowner policies . Even though Geico is a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway , the Company of which Mr. Warren Buffett is Chairman , the Geico Corporation is licensed to do business in all States and would pay claims under the Geico name .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does Geico have life insurance ? Most of you know that Geico is a property casualty insurance company , and of course they have the gecko as their advertising mascot . They outsource all their life insurance applications off their web to an outside vendor , so they do n't really manufacture term life insurance nor do the manufacture permanent life insurance . So when you 're looking for life insurance and you 're one of their actual policy holders in property casualty , a lot of times you 'll stay within that agency and you 'll go ahead and purchase other insurances like life insurance . If you 're looking for life insurance , you may want to also look online at different brokerage houses to see if their price tags are any better than what Geico is offering .
No , Geico does not offer Disability Insurance . To obtain a Disability Insurance quote , contact a Life Insurance or Disability Insurance office or website that can shop several companies to find your best quote . Long Term Disability Insurance is offered through a number of companies , and these agencies can help you find the one that has your most affordable option .
Geico is really two entities . One is the insurance company that provides auto and vehicle coverage . The other is the Geico insurance agency . They are simply like any other independent agency in that they represent other companies through which they place insurance . This is what Geico does with life insurance . If you purchase life insurance with them , it will be placed with a different company . That does n't necessarily make it bad . It 's most likely a company that many independents write through . My advice is to find the right agent . One you can trust to do the best thing for you and your family , not just the cheapest option . Then listen to him/her and take their advice . You 'll come out ahead in the long run .
Geico acts as both an insurance company and an insurance agency for other insurance carriers . Although Geico is known for their Direct Auto Insurance Policies , Geico Home Insurance is offered by Stillwater Insurance Group . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Geico life insurance is written through non-affiliated life insurance companies and is secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. . Therefore , Geico offers life insurance from a number of different life insurance companies at a variety of prices . You can get free life insurance quotes from any number of websites . By choosing one that gives `` instant '' quotes you will get your rates without having to talk to anyone .
Geico does write home insurance as a broker but not as an insurer . This means that you can work with a Geico representative to purchase a home policy and they can even service the policy , but that policy is actually written through another carrier . If you have a home policy through Geico you can find out who the insurer by reviewing the policy declarations page .
Unfortunately , Geico does not carry Disability Insurance . Geico mainly carries property-casualty insurance , including home , condo , co-op , mobile home , flood , and renter 's insurance ; auto , commercial auto , collector car , motorcycle , ATV , boat , water craft , snowmobile , and umbrella insurance ; overseas and business insurance ; identity theft insurance ; and life insurance from an outside source .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
GEICO or Government Employees Insurance Companyper se does not underwrite a life insurance , it is primarily a property and casualty company focused on auto , boats , motorcycles , RVs , etc. . You may find that agents that sell GEICO products offer life insurance but through other life insurance companies or will refer the life insurance business out to other carriers .
Let me share my experience.I 'm a licensed fee-based -LRB- accept no commissions -RRB- insurance consultant who has studied insurance , obtained a number of industry designations , owned and operated a general insurance agency for nearly forty years and helped thousands of insurance consumers with their insurance questions . I have long harbored ill will toward GEICO and other insurers who chose not to do business with independent agents . I believe their sales staff -LRB- and that of other insurers selling direct to the public -RRB- are trained to sell what the insurer wants to sell ; not what the consumer really needs . But I recently sought to purchase auto insurance for myself and checked out a number of on-line insurance offerings . GEICO 's premiums were one third of those indicated by E-surance , Progressive , and several others . The application process and live discussion with a sales person was cordial , professional and non-threatening . I was able to access my coverage information on-line , pay premiums directly and obtain insurance cards.Actually my experience was better than any I 've had with any independent agent . My conclusion , it is still important to know what you need and want . It is you against a large insurer and that means be cautious . But for my money I certainly would consider GEICO as an insurer.If nothing else they deserve a look .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Geico does not write homeowners insurance themselves . However , they do offer it as an agent for other companies . So , if you call Geico , they can get you homeowners coverage but it will be with a different company . My advice is to find a local agent you trust who will actually sit down with you and coordinate all your coverages . As much as some companies will try to convince you that all insurance is the same , I assure you it 's not . It takes time and careful consideration to put together insurance coverages that will protect you and your family correctly . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . You 'll save money and aggravation in the long run .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A 1035 Exchange From Life Insurance To An Annuity ?
A 1035 exchange is an IRS code section that allows a tax free transfer of cash vales from one annuity policy to another annuity policy or a life insurance policy to an annuity policy . This is also an opportunity to transfer basis in a policy as well for future use . You can not use section 1035 to transfer cash values from an annuity policy to a life insurance policy .
To put it simply , it is a means of rolling the cash value of a life insurance policy into an annuity directly by the companies involved rather than filling out surrender forms , waiting for the check to arrive , and then placing the funds into the new contract . Keep in mind that when you do this you are losing your life insurance . Make sure it is truly to your advantage and not just the advantage of the person trying to sell you an annuity . Be very careful when replacing life insurance .
Yes , you can do a Section 1035 exchange from a life insurance contract to an annuity , just not the other way around . Section 1035 permits the policy owner to trade certain kinds of contracts for another on a tax-free basis . The following types of exchanges are allowed under Section 1035 : Life contract for life contract Life contract for annuity contract Life contract for endowment contract Annuity contract for annuity contract Endowment contract for endowment contract Since 2010 , it is also possible to exchange a life , annuity , or endowment contract for a long-term care contract or exchange one long-term care contract for another long-term care contract .
No , you can not do a 1035 exchange from an annuity to life insurance . That would be considered a replacement , with tax consequences . Doing the reverse as a 1035 exchange is OK ; you can 1035 exchange a life insurance policy to an annuity issued by a life insurance company , with certain conditions .
A 1035 exchange is an IRS code that allows the tax free transfer from one life insurance policy to another . Some life insurance companies may also use the 1035 exchange rules to transfer basis or premium as basis . Generally a 1035 exchange inherently includes a replacement notice as well to the existing life insurance company from the replacing life insurance company .
Non qualified tax deferred annuities can be exchanged to another non qualified tax deferred annuity via section 1035 of the IRA code without a taxable event . Keep in mind that non qualified tax deferred annuities can not be exchanged to a qualified annuity or vise versa . The 1035 rule exchange is a powerful tax advantage .
An annuity transfer from one annuity to another is a tax free 1035 exchange . This permits the transfer one annuity to another annuity without incurring a taxable event on the gain in the policy . A 1035 exchange also includes the notification of the policy surrender from the replacing company to the existing company .
An annuity rollover from one annuity to another is generally a tax free 1035 exchange . The rollover needs to be in the same non-qualified or qualified category . This permits the transfer one annuity to another annuity without incurring a taxable event on the gain in the policy . A 1035 exchange also includes the notification of the policy surrender from the replacing company to the existing company .
If you are thinking about switching life insurance companies there are a couple of thing you should know . when you go from one insurance company to the next you have to go through the underwriting process all over again so never cancel your existing policy until you are approved for the new one . Some agents may talk to you about doing a 1035 exchange , taking the cash value from one policy and moving it to the new one . If it 's a whole life policy and you have had it for five years or more , never do a 1035 exchange , instead take a paid up policy option . A policy that has a $ 1,000 of cash value is only worth $ 1,000 of cash on a 1035 exchange but the same policy with $ 1,000 of cash is general worth a little more than double in paid of life insurance , so around $ 2,300 . I hope this information was helpful . If you have more questions just ask .
Assuming that by rollover you mean exchange your existing cash value life insurance policy for a new one , heres the answer . Under the 1035 exchange rules you can transfer from one life insurance company to another without taxation on the gain or use the proceeds to carry forward basis . A limited inventory of life insurance companies accept 1035 exchanges with policy loans .
A 1035 exchange is an IRS code section that allows a tax free transfer of cash vales from one annuity policy to another annuity policy or a life insurance policy to an annuity policy . This is also an opportunity to transfer basis in a policy as well for future use . You can not use section 1035 to transfer cash values from an annuity policy to a life insurance policy .
No , you can not 1035 an annuity to life insurance . You can do the reverse : 1035 exchange a life insurance policy to a savings or income annuity . But you are not able to 1035 to life insurance . Consult your insurance agent , financial planner , and/or tax attorney for specific information and options for your particular situation .
Section 1035 exchange is a class of financial transaction in which a life insurance or annuity policy is replaced for a new one without any taxable event . There are several classes of exchanges under Section 1035 of the Internal Revenue Code . Section 1030 group of exchanges is a series of tax codes that applies to the tax free situations . Some basic requirements include provisions such as the new policy must be owned by the same individual as the old policy and the new policy must have the same or greater face value .
The IRS created section 1035 for the free exchange of annuities to annuities polices as well as life insurance cash values to annuities polices . But you can not use the 1035 exchange rules to transfer annuity values to life insurance policy . If your annuity policy has no gain it you consider funding life insurance with your annuity surrender value . But consult your tax adviser before moving forward considering surrenders or exchanges .
A 1035 exchange life insurance is a way of replacing your cash value life insurance policy without having to pay taxes on the cash value , per the advice given above . You can exchange your life insurance for another life insurance policy or for an annuity . The owner and insured must be the same on the old and new policy , and the exchange must take place directly between the insurance companies .
Yes , you can do a 1035 exchange on the cash value of a permanent life insurance to an annuity . Some people choose to do this because of the higher gains of an annuity , or because they no longer need life insurance . But sometimes it is better to 1035 your life insurance to another life insurance policy . There is no going back , so be sure to review all the consequences with a trusted financial advisor before making this decision .
You can either cash out the policy and stop paying the premium . Or you can 1035 exchange the policy for a better one that suits your needs . 1035 is a tax code that allows you to exchange one life insurance product for another without a tax penalty . Variable policies suck . Too many moving parts and hidden fees that are never explained by the agent selling the piece of crap .
Tax deferred annuities generally have maturity or contract dates . Some annuity contracts rollover to a new period . It 's important to be aware of these dates , so you can decide whether to remain in the existing annuity or look for another alternative , one of which may be a 1035 exchange into a new annuity contract .
A 1035 Exchange in Life insurance is where you terminate or `` exchange '' one plan for another . There are specific restrictions and only certain policies will qualify . But the most important aspect is that you recognize no taxes in the transaction ... at least at this time . Sometimes an annuity can also be involved in the transaction . A full-time broker or financial planner is your best resource .
The answer is yes . Combining two annuities into one can be done through an IRS Section 1035 . This is a simple process , the agent will simply fill out two 1035 transfer forms and submit it with the new application . This is all assuming your annuities are Non-qualified dollars . If you have qualified monies , you can still transfer two annuities into one . Instead of using a sec . 1035 transfer , the agent would simple use a transfer form specifying as a direct transfer .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Does One Get Disability Insurance ?
Besides getting Disability Insurance from a local agent , you can find a trusted website that will shop multiple carriers for you . E.g. . Our agency uses Disability Insurance Services to find the best quotes and companies for our clients . If you look your policy through a personal website that treats you well , they can serve you for many years to come . Many people find that online agencies are more prompt in answering service requests than contacting their original agent . But of course , both options are good .
You can receive disability insurance by finding a Life agent in your area or online . It 's nice to have someone in your area that you know so that they can be around to help should you ever need to file a claim . They 'll be able to shop around for you and find quotes from multiple carriers . Be sure you ask to see multiple offers and have your agent explain the different provisions on the policy . Sometimes the bells and whistles seen great , but depending on your occupation , they might be unnecessary . If you have a specific insurance company in mind , they can usually refer you to an agent who is already appointed with their company . You can also look for an disability insurance wholesaler who can put you in contact with an agent in your area that they already know and trust .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
How to choose disability insurance ? Well , first thing you check before rates and dollars paid out is the `` definition '' of disability . This is the only thing that matters as if you do not meet the definition of disability the policy will not pay out . The next is how long does the duration of the definition of disability last ? Is it different durations for different disabilities ? A policy is only as good as the definitions it pays from . Words are so very important with disability insurance . Unlike life insurance where death pretty much determines the payout , disability has to meet a definition within the policy to be paid out .
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
How hard is it to get disability insurance ? Well let 's qualify it this two ways . First is it hard to get a poor disability policy ? No , it 's really easy and as long as nothing happens to you , you 'll never know if was money wasted or not . If something happens however , that 's when you find out . The other choice is a good disability policy with a real solid definition of disability that does n't find ways to reduce or even take away your benefit . Those will be hard to get , underwritten tightly and work fantastic if needed . Why so hard to get ? A payout on a disability policy that has that strong definition could pay out into the millions when a COLA rider is attached to it and with the strong definition , a person could still collect while working in another field . The RISK to the insurer is high , so they underwrite tight .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
How to shop for long term disability care insurance ? First start with a group of companies to compare from . Then READ the plans . The most important anything in a disability policy is the definition of what is disability . It does n't matter how long or how much if you never met the definition of disability stated inside the policy . The cheapest premiums with the highest payouts mean nothing if you never meet the policy 's definition .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
How does Disability Insurance protect you ? By protecting your INCOME . Unless we are fortunate enough to have a partner who makes enough to support our lifestyles , most of us would undergo substantial hardship by losing our source of income due to a disability . Even short term disabilities can quickly deplete the reserves some of us have stashed away for emergencies . Long Term or permanent disabilities can be devastating to even high income earners . Having Disability Insurance does not provide you with 100 % of your original salary , but can replace approx 70 % of it so that you at least have some time to regroup and evaluate your employment and lifestyle situation . It may be possible to live on 70 % of your income , even indefinitely . It is not possible to live with no income at all . That is the protection Disability Insurance provides .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Penalty For Not Having Car Insurance In Alabama ?
Generally speaking the penalty is revocation of your driver 's license . This will typically take place if you do not provide the DMV with proof of insurance , typically done with form SR-22 . If you lapse coverage without having additional coverage established the insurer will typically notify the DMV as they are legally required to do . The DMV will then begin revocation if you can not provide proof of insurance .
The state of Alabama does require proof of liability insurance to register a car . As of Jan 1 , 2013 Alabama can check your insurance against the Alabama Online Insurance Verification System -LRB- OVIS -RRB- to verify the insurance . You can find a list of the full requirements for registering a vehicle on the Alabama Department of Revenue website .
If you have a license in another state , you can apply for a nonresident license in Alabama by using the NIPR -LRB- National Insurance Producer Registry -RRB- . If you are starting your life insurance career in Alabama , you must study for the licensing test , pass it , pay the appropriate fees , and use your life insurance license in Alabama to benefit your life and the lives of others .
In order to get an insurance license in Alabama you will need to complete any pre-licensing requirements and then take the state licensing test . The state of Alabama will also require that you complete a background check . Upon completion of both items the state will issue you a resident producer license which will allow you to write life insurance contracts in the state .
Viva is a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- that services many regions of the state of Alabama - they are owned by Triton Health Systems . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Viva Medicare Plus is a Medicare Advantage Plan offered by Viva Health . In addition to plans with and without drug coverage , members of the Viva Medicare Plus are offered some free preventative services . The service area is in Alabama , mainly around Mobile and a wide corridor going north and south along I - 65 .
Medicare Region C includes the states Alabama , Arkansas , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi , New Mexico , North Carolina , Oklahoma , South Carolina , Tennessee , Texas , Virginia , West Virginia , Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands . This and other regions are designated for the purpose of supplying Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- for Medicare .
Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- are good plans if you are in good health and not using a lot of medical services . In Alabama where I practice MA Plans have high out of pocket cost for people with serious or chronic health problems , as much as $ 6700 in a calendar year . The problem I see with MA Plans is that people start out using them when they are in good health but once your health changes and you have to use your MA Plan more and more you become unhappy with your out of pocket cost for Medicare covered services . If you become unhappy with your MA Plan and want to switch to a Medicare Supplement you may not be able to if you have serious health problems or you may pay a much higher premium because of your health . My professional recommendation is to get a Medicare Supplement even if you are in good health because you need a Medicare Health Plan that not only meets your needs today but will continue to meet your needs as you get older and your health care needs change . If you wait until you need a Medicare Supplement because your health has changed you may not be able to . Insurance companies that offer Medicare Supplement Plans can and do turn down people that have serious pre-existing health conditions .
Unlike omst parts of the Affordable Care Act , if you are employed by a business with less than 50 full time employees , your employer has the option of offering coverage , but not is not mandated to do so . The health law does not require businesses with fewer than 50 employees to offer health insurance to their workers . Small Employers wanting to offer coverage to employees may do so using the SHOP exchange , which is meant to help small business owners find affordable coverage . The government offers certainincentives in the form oftax credits and deductions to encourage employers with fewer than 25 employees who set up coverage through SHOP and help pay for it . Currently in Alabama , the only way to sign up for a SHOP plan is to go see an agent , broker or insurance company and fill out the paperwork . Online enrollment is scheduled to be available during next fall 's open enrollment period , starting November 15 , 2014 .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
I presume you are asking about the individual mandate requirement of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and the tax penalty associated with not having health insurance or health insurance that meets the requirements of the Affordable Care Act . The term `` levy '' is technically inaccurate as that is an assessment applied to a population in general . Persons without health insurance in 2014 will be subject to a tax penalty when they file their 2014 tax returns in 2015 . The penalty for being uninsured in 2014 will be $ 95 per adult and $ 47.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 285 per household -RRB- or 1 % of their Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- , whichever is greater . The tax penalty for being uninsured in 2015 will increase to $ 325 per adult and $ 162.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 975 per household -RRB- or 2 % of their MAGI , whichever is greater . If you persist in being uninsured in 2016 the tax penalty jumps to $ 695 per adult and $ 347.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 2085 per household -RRB- or 2.5 % of MAGI , whichever is greater . In subsequent years the tax penalty will be adjusted upward by the inflation rate . As the law is currently constructed , the tax penalties described above can only be collected by the IRS from any income tax refund that the taxpayer would have received . The IRS can not bill the taxpayer for the penalty , place a lien on their assets or criminally prosecute the taxpayer . Obviously , this means that an uninsured person 's tax penalty on paper and what their true penalty -LRB- if any -RRB- might be will be directly related to whether they are eligible for a tax refund . So , a person 's ability to structure their tax withholding during the course of the year , or in the case of self-employed persons making estimated tax payments , so that they have little or no refund or owe additional taxes when filing their tax return may largely negate or eliminate the tax penalty for being uninsured .
Everyone will have to have health insurance that meets the standards set under the affordable care act or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Under the Affordable Care Act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You 're not going to go to jail for not having health insurance . If you do n't have health coverage that meets the minimum essential coverage requirements , you would be subject to paying a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage .
Under the Affordable Care Act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
No one has to buy health insurance , but it 's very advantageous to have it . The idea of health insurance is to protect yourself in case of a catastrophic financial event . In the case of health insurance , this can be when you have a visit to the hospital and/or you have to have surgery . While health insurance can be expensive , if you ended up in the hospital one time , you can be subject to thousands of dollars worth of medical bills . Under the affordable care act , if you do not want to purchase health insurance , you can elect topay a penalty instead -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , you do n't have to have health insurance . However , underthe Affordable Care Act , if you do not want to buy a health plan , you will have to pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . Many individuals have options for group insurance through their employer or they are on Medicare or Medicaid . If you decide to buy a health insurance plan , then you would either need to buy it on or off the health insurance exchanges . Buying on the exchanges is beneficial if you qualify for a subsidy . Subsidies can only be used for on-exchange plans - they can not be used towards plans sold off the health exchanges . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . If you have any other questions about your health insurance , send me a private message by clicking on my `` contact me '' button .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Under the affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , you do n't have to have health insurance . However , underthe Affordable Care Act , if you do not want to buy a health plan , you will have to pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . Many individuals have options for group insurance through their employer or they are on Medicare or Medicaid . If you decide to buy a health insurance plan , then you would either need to buy it on or off the health insurance exchanges . Buying on the exchanges is beneficial if you qualify for a subsidy . Subsidies can only be used for on-exchange plans - they can not be used towards plans sold off the health exchanges . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Mouse Damage ?
Your homeowners policy contains exclusions . One of the common exclusions for property damage is damage caused by birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . However , if the damage is hidden and causes a collapse of all or part of a building , the company will normally pay .
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Damage to a structure from termites , ants and insects in general is not covered under the standard homeowner insurance policy . The underlying theory is that such damage is the result of infestation due to negligence on the part of the homeowner as the proximate cause of the occurrence . The homeowner is obligated to inspect for such damage and remedy the situation accordingly . Homeowner insurance covers structural damage that is sudden and accidental in nature . Infestation does not fit these criteria . Check with a qualified -LRB- recommended -RRB- and fully licensed pest control operation in your area . You may be able to purchase a policy or bond that would cover you for certain types of infestation after they have inspected and possibly treated your residence structure . We are talking about structural damages here . There could be coverage for damages that might occur from a roof collapse , for example , resulting from the infestation , that causes loss to other property within the dwelling . However , the infestation damage itself is not covered .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
It depends upon the source of the water damage , the type of policy you have and whether the house is abandoned . To make this answer easier , lets assume that you have a Homeowners 3 policy and the house is either occupied or vacant -LRB- some furniture and presence -RRB- . Water damage from a burst pipe : typically your homeowners insurance will water damage from a burst pipe , however it will not cover the damaged pipe . You can get an endorsement to cover the damaged pipes . Water damage from rain/hail/wind : this will only be covered on a basic homeowners policy if the rain/hail caused the hole in the roof that lead to the water damage in your bathroom . Once again , you can get an endorsement to cover rain/hail/wind damage . Water damage from sewer backup or sump-pump failure : if the bathroom is in the basement and the water damage if from sewer backup or sump-pump failure you can only get coverage for this IF you have the appropriate endorsement - sewer and water backup . Please note that this is typically a sub-limit in your policy and goes towards both cleanup and replacement . I hope this helps .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
It 's the homeowner 's responsibility to remove dead or damaged trees before they fall . Homeowners insurance will not cover dead or damaged trees . Homeowners insurance will cover resulting damage and the cost to cut up the tree if the trees falls on covered property . If a tree falls over but does not hit covered property , there is no coverage . If your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , your neighbor is only responsible for the portion of the tree located on his property . The portion of the tree on your property is your responsibility even though it 's not your tree .
-- > Normal 0 All homeowners policies will cover your home and personal property should it be damaged but the type of damage you are covered for is defined in two general types of insuring agreements . One type -LRB- Named Peril -RRB- will tell you what specific types of damage you are covered for . The policies will actually name them ; fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , vandalism , etc. . For damage to be covered , you have to prove to the insurance company that the damage you sustained was caused by one of these named perils . The second type of insuring agreement -LRB- often referred to as all-risk -RRB- covers you for any direct damage unless the policy specifically excludes or limits it . Under this form of insurance , any damage is covered unless the insurance company can prove a specific exclusion or limitation applies . The burden of proof shifts from you proving you are covered under a Named Peril policy to the insurance company proving you are not covered under an All-Risk type policy . A small difference which means a lot should you have a claim . The term all-risk isnt used too much anymore ; this type of policy is often referred to as Special Form or Open Peril policies . Whatever you want to call them , this is the type of insuring agreement you should look for . Most of us are not prepared to prove anything to an insurance company . Its also much easier to understand what you are not covered for simply by reading the exclusions and limitations .
Home insurance covers damages . An all risk homeowners policy covers many perils , however it specifically excludes some . Among these exclusions in most policies is earth movement and intrusion of water from outside the residence . Homeowners insurance does not cover wear and tear to any component of the house , including the drainage . For example , if a drainage pipe were damaged in a fire , it would be covered . If the same pipe failed , it probably would not be covered . Incidentally the damage caused by the failed drainage pipe might be covered .
If a fallen tree , whether your own or your neighbors , has landed in your yard , on car or on your home , you are likely wondering whether your current homeowners insurance policy will cover the repair costs . Damage to your home and its contents , regardless of whether the trees origin was from your own property or a neighboring , is covered under a homeowners policy . For property such as sheds , additions or detached garages , there is generally a maximum amount of coverage offered for fallen tree damage -LRB- i.e. 10 % of your entire propertys value -RRB- . Even though your homeowners insurance policy will cover damage resulting from fallen trees , it is important to keep in mind that you are financially responsible for any applicable policy deductible . For example , if your homeowners insurance policy has a $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 deductible and the total cost of repairs is $ 25,000 , you will be required to pay either $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 out of pocket for the clean-up to be completed . If the fallen tree was from your neighbors yard , it is possible that your insurance company will attempt to get their policy to cover the cost of the damage . In this event , you may be refunded any deductible you paid for the repairs .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Insurance covers specified perils . Water damage is the result of an event . Everything depends upon what caused the water damage . If the damage is caused by the sudden rupture of water pipes inside the home , the damage is covered by most homeowners policies . If the damage is caused by the overflow of a toilet , the loss would be excluded by most homeowners policies . Incidentally , many insurance companies will provide coverage for the overflowing of a toilet if an extension to coverage is purchased at an increased premium . If the loss is caused by water enter the house from outside it is most likely not going to be covered . Flood insurance , an additional insurance policy is required to cover this type of loss . While it is true that flood damage is not always clear cut , it is important to note that almost one quarter of all property claims involve flood damage in the United States . The purchase of a flood policy is a wise move regardless of where you are located . I have seen desert towns inundated as well as mountain communities . In some places flooding is common .
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How To Apply For Social Security Disability Insurance ?
To apply for Social Security Disability Insurance you must contact your local social security office . You should also make sure that you are eligible for social security disability , the requirements are : 1 . You must have been disabled for at least five months 2 . You must have a disability that is expected to last one year or more , or result in your death 3 . You must be unable to perform the material and substantial duties of any occupation for which you are appropriately trained and/or licensed .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Retirement , Survivors , and Disability Insurance is a reference to three of the benefits that Social Security pays to those who have paid into Social Security taxes . The `` retirement '' part refers to Social Security income that people get when they retire . the `` survivors '' part refers to the Social Security income benefits paid to dependents of a qualified deceased person . And the `` disability '' part refers to Social Security Disability benefits disabled persons receive if they are qualified .
Social Security Disability Insurance is a payroll tax social program . It falls under the pervue of Social Security Administration . It provides income to people who cant work because of a disability . Social Security Disability can be temporary or permanent benefit . Social Security Disability does not depend on the income of the disabled individual receiving it .
To addend to Peggy 's note above - she 's provided an excellent foundation . Disability protection is critical to a solid financial foundation . Unfortunately , mostdo not realize how important protection is until it 's too late - after they become too sick or hurt to work . The chances of suffering a disability are higher than manythink and the effects can be devastating . As Peggy said , if you depend on your paycheck - you need to consider this converage strongly ! Consider This : Almost one-third of Americans entering the work force today -LRB- 3 in 10 -RRB- will become disabled before they retire . -LSB- Social Security Administration Fact Sheet Jan 2009 -RSB- Applications for Social Security benefits increased by 21 percent , but only 35 percent of the 2.8 million workers who applied for SSDI were approved . -LSB- Social Security Administration Office of Disability and Income Security Prgrams . -RSB-
If you qualify for Social Security Disability and are disabled for two years you will qualify for Medicare . I have many clients on Medicare and Social Security Disability . The key here is Social Security Disability . If you are collecting on a private disability policy and you are not yet on Social Security Disability then you can not get Medicare .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
There are two products provided through Social Security : 1 -RRB- Social Security Disability Insurance and 2 -RRB- SSI , or Supplemental Security Income . Social Security Disability Insurance -LRB- commonly referred to as `` Disability '' is for people who have become disabled . They will get Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . Those on SSI are disabled or blind and also have limited income and resources . In most states , they are usually automatically eligible for Medicaid when they go on SSI .
To apply for Social Security Disability Insurance you must contact your local social security office . You should also make sure that you are eligible for social security disability , the requirements are : 1 . You must have been disabled for at least five months 2 . You must have a disability that is expected to last one year or more , or result in your death 3 . You must be unable to perform the material and substantial duties of any occupation for which you are appropriately trained and/or licensed .
The social security number is a necessary method of identifying you and your record . Most insurers use this number to zero in on your identity . Unfortunately , your social security number is used to identify you and your record to insurance carriers , and just about every other kind of business that is granting credit or coverage . Would n't it be nice to be able to protect this one vital bit of information and have another identifying number we could use ? But I digress ... But , as identifiers go , the social security number is probably the best current way for your creditors and insurance companies to make sure you are really you . Insurance is making a bigger and bigger use of credit base underwriting and pricing every year and most carriers use credit to one extent or another in insurance eligibility and pricing . Companies are also using vast data base records of claims and driving history that are often cataloged by your address , your name , your spouse , former addresses , and even the prior owners and subsequent owners of cars you have once owned and insured . With all the potential for confusion , your social security number is one unique bit of information that is n't easily duplicated in these claims and records databases . So , in that one way , your social security number helps keep you from being lumped together with others who may have a similar name , owned your car , or lived in the same house or apartment . Your social security number has been tied to credit reports and your borrowing for decades so insurance companies use this number to be as certain as possible they are looking at your record and not someone with a similar name . While the social security number has now been exploited for way to many reasons of identification , it is good that you still have one way to separate yourself from others with similarities that can cause confusion in underwriting and pricing your insurance and that is a good thing . Hope this helps .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
Yes , people can collect Social Security Disability benefits , and do not have to buy private Disability Insurance to get cash while being disabled . However , to get Social Security disability benefits you must generally be disabled for at least a year , and be unable to work -LRB- or be trained to work -RRB- at any job . Private Disability Insurance pays benefits more quickly . Also , with DI , if you have the `` own occupation '' feature , it pays if you can not work at your OWN job , not just ANY job . Finally , private disability insurance pays a higher benefit than Social Security DI . You can even supplement SSDI with DI .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Social Security defines a disability as expected to last at least one year or to result in death and prevents one from doing any substantial , gainful work . Through our Social Security system here in the United States , benefits are available for workers -LRB- and their families -RRB- who have earned enough work credits to be eligible for Social Security disability benefits . What that means is that the individual must have a proven work record of credits in order to qualify for disability benefits under Social Security , and they must have paid into the system in order to obtain a benefit from it . -LRB- For young workers , the criteria are a little different because of their limited time in the employment market . -RRB-
If you are under age 65 and have applied for disability with Social Security , if approved by Social Security you will eventually become eligible for Medicare . The general guideline is following 2 years of Social Security disability payments you are eligible for Medicare but there are specific medical conditions , such as ESRD , where you can be awarded Medicare benefits before two years have passed .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Work After You Die ?
Actually life insurance was designed to work after your death . There are several types of life insurance policies with lots of riders that pay for lots of afflictions and uses . The one thing that all types of life insurance policies have in common is that they all pay a death benefit to your named beneficiary . So to answer your question , yes life insurance begins to work upon your death by paying the proceeds to your beneficiary tax free .
Once the death benefit is paid for a life insurance policy , the policy is no longer in effect , and no longer `` works '' . The death benefit is paid when the insured person dies . That is the main purpose of life insurance , to pay a death benefit when the insured person dies .
Does Life Insrance work after you die ? Many would say that 's the only time it does work . Life insurance is all about death benefit . You pay the premiums while you are living . You name a beneficiary . Also a backup beneficiary in case your main beneficiary dies before you do . Upon your death ... your beneficiary gets paid . It 's a beautiful thing .
Joint Universal Life Insurance is a universal life insurance policy that covers two people . It can be a `` first to die '' or `` second to die '' policy . If a first to die UL , the policy will pay the death benefit to the survivor when the first of the two persons passes away . If a second to die UL , the policy will pay the death benefit to a third party when both of the insured persons have passed . This latter type of joint coverage is also called survivorship life insurance . Some reasons people may purchase joint universal insurance are : 1 -RRB- They want to consolidate the number of policies they have . 2 -RRB- One of the insured persons may be uninsurable under a regular policy , but can be covered by a second to die policy . 3 -RRB- Only the survivor needs the coverage ... after the second person passes away there is no need for life insurance ... thus a first to die policy works well for them .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
The cheapest life insurance policy is the one that you already own . The cheapest life insurance policy you can buy is one that is scheduled to expire the day after you die . The fact is that the cheapest life insurance policy is always the one that is in force on the day that you die . If that is your concern work with a good life insurance agent . The agent can match your needs with a policy that will fit into your budget . Remember that when you save money on the premium and the policy expires before you die ; it is your loved ones that pay the price .
Life insurance is usually purchased for the benefit of someone else . E.g. . So that your spouse and children can lead relatively normal lives without having to move , take second jobs , forego college to work , etc. . In that respect , life insurance gives you the satisfaction of knowing you are caring for those you brought into your life , even after your death . It gives them a feeling of gratitude and respect for you . It allows you to relax a little and not have the worry upon your shoulders about what would happen to them after you die . Some life insurance can also benefit you financially . E.g. . You could purchase cash value life insurance that provides supplemental income during retirement . You could get life insurance on your key employees so that you are not left in a lurch if they should pass . You could take out life insurance on someone who owes you money , or whom you wish to buy out if they should die . There are many types of life insurance and many ways it can benefit you .
Does Life Insrance work after you die ? Many would say that 's the only time it does work . Life insurance is all about death benefit . You pay the premiums while you are living . You name a beneficiary . Also a backup beneficiary in case your main beneficiary dies before you do . Upon your death ... your beneficiary gets paid . It 's a beautiful thing .
Disability Income insurance -LRB- DI -RRB- being expensive is a relative question , and the question back is `` Relative to what ? `` Then , it becomes a question of value : `` Does the value provided by a policy that replaces up to about 2/3 of one 's income if they become unable to work due to accident or illness justify the premium the agent is showing me ? `` First , let 's just deal with the question of cost . Disability income insurance does become expensive the older one gets . Whereas the premium for a DI policy might run about 1-2 % of one 's income in their 20 's , it could cost about 4-5 % of their income in their late 40s or 50s . After age 60 , few carriers will even consider an application for DI insurance -LRB- although there are specialty carriers that will write `` term '' DI over that age -RRB- . DI is a complex insurance contract and has many `` moving parts '' . The more risk you want to transfer to the insurance company -LRB- amount of income to replace , inflation protection of income being replaced , future purchase of monthly benefit without the need to medically qualify , to name a few -RRB- , the higher the premium.Obtaining DI insurance through employee benefits may cost nothing - the employer picks up the tab for all employees . There may also be options to `` buy up '' additional coverage not provided in the employer-paid portion of the coverage . This is an inexpensive way to get at least some coverage against the risk of not being able to work for an extended period of time.Buying one 's own DI contract , however , puts the policyowner in control of all costs and coverage available from the insurance company . Whereas group DI can be canceled without notice by an employer , and when one leaves employment with that company DI coverage is rarely portable , owning one 's own policy usually provides the best , long-term solution to the problem . When you own your own DI , your coverage can not be cancelled . Premiums may also be guaranteed to never go up . And , regardless of where you work after getting your own policy , you 're covered.So , is DI expensive ? Run the numbers on yourself . If you could n't work for an extended period of time - or never be able to work -LRB- permanent and total disability -RRB- - how would you pay the cost of living ? Mortgage payments ? Food ? Rent ? Clothing ? Car payments?One is more likely to experience a disabling event in his/her lifetime than to die prematurely . Insure your paycheck . The cost is worth it .
By really work , I assume you mean does it pay a death claim when you die ? Yes . It does . There are many different kinds of life insurance . It 's not a lottery ticket . Term policies pay out if you die within a certain term and the coverage is in force . You can renew them but at a MUCH higher rate . Whole-Life costs more initially but is designed to always be in force .
Whole Life covers you for your `` whole life '' . Term Life covers you for a term , or set number of years . Whole Life has cash value that can be utilized while you are still alive . Term Life does not -LRB- except for Term with living benefits , which allows you to use part of the death benefit if certain triggers are met -RRB- . Whole Life allows you to pay the entire premium at once , or in a limited number of years , after which no more premiums are owed . Term Life requires that you make periodic payments over the entire duration of the policy . If you drop a Whole Life policy after some length of time , you will usually have a reduced paid up policy that you can keep without making further premium payments . If you drop a Term policy , your coverage ends and you do not have any return of cash -LRB- unless you buy ROP , or return of premium Term Life -RRB- . With participating Whole Life , you may get dividend checks over the years . With Term Life , the only benefit you get will be if you die before the term ends . Whole Life costs more because it is a permanent product and has cash value in addition to death protection . Term Life costs less because it is temporary and offers pure death protection .
When people that you love will suffer when you die , you need life insurance . If that need will remain for many years , perhaps even until the day that you die , you need permanent insurance . The most popular form of permanent insurance is whole life insurance . It provides that the company will pay fixed amount when you die , regardless of when that occurs . In exchange you are required to pay a premium that is also fixed and does not change even as you grow older and the risk of death increases dramatically . There are alternative forms of permanent insurance in which you give up guarantees for flexibility .
Yes , your estate does include life insurance . While you are alive , it just includes the cash value available in your policy or policies . After death , the life insurance proceeds paid out to beneficiaries are included in the value of the estate . If a spouse is alive , there will not be any estate tax consequences . It is when the surviving spouse dies that the life insurance proceeds on that spouse can a taxable event -LRB- or if the first spouse to die left insurance money to the second to die , and those proceeds had not been spent or distributed when the second spouse died -RRB- .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Joint last to die policies also may be known as second to die or survivorship life . The contract permits two policy insureds on one contract . It was originally conceived after the Martial deduction Actunder the Economic Recovery Tax A ct of 1981 andbecame law allowing the unlimited transfer of assets to the surviving spouse . Therefore , joint last to die polices were created to pay at the second death of the policy insured .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
The principal objective of estate planning is to ensure that your property is managed most efficiently during your lifetime and that your wishes are carried out most effectively after you die . Since life insurance creates tax free cash at death it has many applications in Estate Planning . Life insurance can be used to create an estate , to provide cash to take care of your family after you are gone . Life insurance can also be used in estate conservation and estate equalization . Once you have determined your objectives and calculated the need for cash to pay taxes , fees and other costs , nothing delivers cash at death as effectively as life insurance . Another use is estate equalization , in a situation where you want to give a fixed asset to one heir and balance it out with life insurance cash to another . In business situations , life insurance can be used to provide the cash not only to pay taxes and fees , but also to fund a buy sell agreement between partners . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The best life insurance policies are the ones that work best for peoples ' needs . All life insurance policies pay upon death , but there are many differences beyond that . Some are designed to accumulate cash value that you can use for expenses later in life , or that will pay your premiums later . These are permanent policies that , if properly managed , will pay out when you die , or at age 100 , whichever comes first . Some are designed to simply pay if you die within a certain number of years . They have no cash value and if you pass away after the term ends , you are not covered . Some are in between . They are n't designed to earn lots of cash value , but they are set up so that they will not end before death , even if you would live to be over 100 years old . If you want a policy to pay for your funeral expenses , the best policy for you is probably one of the permanent policies . If you want a policy that to cover your mortgage that should be paid off in 15 years , you may find 15 year term life insurance to be your best choice . If you have a combination of needs , you can even get a combination of policies . A good life insurance agent can sort through the options to find the life insurance that is best for you .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Which Health Insurance Covers Hearing Aids ?
It is best to approach the need for hearing aidsbeing covered byhealth insurance coverage with very low expectations . While there are variations from state to state and from one health insurance carrier to the next , asa general rule it is probably best to start out with the assumption that hearing aids will not be covered . Then do your homework on your policy or the ones you are considering when it comes to coverage or non-coverage for such devices . In my experience , coverage for hearing aids in individual major medical plans has been and still is an excluded coverage . The same is true for fully insured group policies that I have been familiar with . Sometimes , a self-insured employer may include coverage for hearing aids in their plan designs but even this is rare in my experience . Oddly enough , this appears to have been a coverage area overlooked by the Affordable Care Act as well -LRB- a head scratcher when you consider all the other things they mandated coverage for -RRB- . There are stand alone specialty insurance products that individuals and groups can purchase that provide some coverage for hearing aids so it is possible that some people can address their needs in this manner . I am responding with just ordinary hearing loss and hearing aid issues in mind . The issues can get much more complicated in the cases of infants with issues from birth and the growing use of cochlear implants where arguments over medical necessity are much easier to get into .
It is best to approach the need for hearing aidsbeing covered byhealth insurance coverage with very low expectations . While there are variations from state to state and from one health insurance carrier to the next , asa general rule it is probably best to start out with the assumption that hearing aids will not be covered . Then do your homework on your policy or the ones you are considering when it comes to coverage or non-coverage for such devices . In my experience , coverage for hearing aids in individual major medical plans has been and still is an excluded coverage . The same is true for fully insured group policies that I have been familiar with . Sometimes , a self-insured employer may include coverage for hearing aids in their plan designs but even this is rare in my experience . Oddly enough , this appears to have been a coverage area overlooked by the Affordable Care Act as well -LRB- a head scratcher when you consider all the other things they mandated coverage for -RRB- . There are stand alone specialty insurance products that individuals and groups can purchase that provide some coverage for hearing aids so it is possible that some people can address their needs in this manner . I am responding with just ordinary hearing loss and hearing aid issues in mind . The issues can get much more complicated in the cases of infants with issues from birth and the growing use of cochlear implants where arguments over medical necessity are much easier to get into .
Cigna health insurance plans normally cover at least a portion of the cost of hearing aids . Severe hearing loss is a health issue . There are different kinds of hearing loss and different kinds of hearing aids . Most health insurance plans have limits on the amount they will pay toward the cost of a hearing aid . Approved claims must meet specified standards for the degree of hearing loss .
As previously mentioned , Medicare does not pay for hearing aids . Also , typically , Medigap plans also do not cover hearing aids so the cost must be paid by the consumer . There are a few states that provide hearing benefits , including some for the purchase of hearing aids . These would be through specific state programs including Medicaid . Unfortunately , the pricing can be very expensive . Assuming you want quality hearing aids from an audiologist -LRB- including custom-fitting -RRB- , the cost can be as much as $ 3,500 to $ 7,500 . WEBSITELINK provides resources and assistance to consumers with hearing loss and may offer some helpful ideas .
Some health insurance plans will pay for basic hearing aids . Plans that do cover hearing aids usually have preferred providers you must use , and there is a cap on how much they will pay for a hearing aid . Be sure to read your policy carefully , and ask your agent or carrier about how the hearing aid benefit works .
Hearing aids are not covered by Medicare because they are not seen as `` medically necessary '' . Therefore , Medicare Part A and B do not pay for hearing aids , or the fitting of hearing aids . Some Medicare Advantage plans may have some benefits for hearing exams and appliances to improve hearing . You would need to check with your plan to determine that .
Medicare does n't cover routine hearing exams , hearing aids , or exams for fitting hearing aids . Part B of Medicare will cover diagnostic hearing tests that your doctor orders for a medical reasons like a recent hearing loss due to an illness or injury . If your doctor orders a diagnostic hearing test , then you would pay the 20 % Medicare leaves off if you do n't have a Supplement , plus the Medicare Part B deductible if it has not already been met .
No , hearing aids are not covered by Medicare . You would be responsible for 100 % of the costs for hearing aids - you can secure hearing insurance under a separate policy to have them covered . Medicare Part B can cover diagnostic exams if your doctor says it 's needed for medical treatment . Please feel free to contact me for assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plans do not cover hearing aids - the same goes for vision and dental coverage as well . You would need to purchase a separate hearing insurance plan to cover hearing aids . Send me a private message on here if you would like assistance with your medigap plan needs or check out my website for information as well .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for Esteem hearing implant because it is a fully implantable inner ear hearing aid , and hearing aids are excluded . Medicare will cover prosthetic devices that replace the function of the middle ear , but does not address whether Esteem is considered this type of prosthetic device .
The answer is generally no . Medicare does not cover hearing aids , but like many other items , there are exceptions . If hearing loss is due to injury or illness , Medicare may pay for a portion of the cost of testing by a trained audiologist . In some cases they will also pay for a hearing aid .
No , Medicare does not cover routine dental or vision care . It also does n't cover dentures , hearing aids or the exam for fitting them . However , there are dental and vision plans available and some even cover hearing . A good plan would have immediate coverage for the dental exam , cleanings , fillings and extractions . You should also consider if there is a `` network '' involved .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
A clear understanding of the benefits of each is required to make an intelligent decision . Medicare Advantage plans REPLACE Medicare as your primary insurance . Those plans which are HMO 's require you to pay higher co-pays and deductibles if you use physicians and hospitals which are n't within the insurers network . Benefits under Medicare Advantage plans are usually changed from one year to the next , premiums as well . But each year you can review the various plans in your area and choose the one which seems best for that year . Medicare Supplement policies are designed to pay some or all of the deductibles and co-payments required if you select Medicare as your primary insurance . If Medicare is your primary insurance , you can use any physician who or hospital which accepts Medicare . Medicare Advantage plans do provide additional , usually low cost services . . eye refractions , some dental or hearing aid benefits , and etc. . But Medicare Advantage plans have higher out-of-pocket maximum costs than Medicare/Medigap plans .
If you look on page 56 of your Medicare and You book there is a list of things that Medicare will not cover like Long-term care or custodial care , routine dental or eye care , dentures , acupuncture , hearing aids and exams for fitting them and yes cosmetic surgery is also not covered . With that being said if your doctor find thats it is medically necessary to perform the reduction to elevate pressure from the spinal column that is causing you sever back pain , then it may be covered but you need to check with your doctor and get his professional opinion .
I am not quite sure what your asking , so I will answer this question , which is what I think you asked : `` What are the standard coverages included in a renters policy ? '' The standard coverage in a renters policy includes personal property , liability and medical payments . Personal property can be general property and scheduled property -LRB- i.e. jewelry , cameras , hearing aids -RRB- on premise ; and , sometimes , there can be a sub-limit for personal property off-premise . Liability covers your negligent acts against a third party . Medical payments provides a small sum of money to people who hurt themselves at your rented premise . I hope this answers what you were asking .
Which retirement plan is best ? The one that you actually do . It is more about the habit of saving than anything else . Developing a savings habit will aide anyone in retirement . Waiting for the optimal plan `` before '' you start saving is sort of an excuse I hear many times from people who are n't savers . They fail to set aside funds for the future in any form because it is n't of value to them yet . There are many retirement plan choices , there is no `` best '' as putting zero dollars aside ends up with zero saved . The `` best '' plan is the one where you decide to save and contribute money to .
Some of the items and services that Medicare does n't cover include : < a title = '' Services that include medical and non-medical care provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living , like dressing or bathing . Long-term supports and services can be provided at home , in the community , in assisted living , or in nursing homes . Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age . Medicare and most health insurance plans do n't pay for long-term care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > Long-term care -LRB- also called < a title = '' Non-skilled personal care , like help with activities of daily living like bathing , dressing , eating , getting in or out of a bed or chair , moving around , and using the bathroom . It may also include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves , like using eye drops . In most cases , Medicare does n't pay for custodial care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > custodial care -RRB- Most dental care Eye examinations related to prescribing glasses Dentures Cosmetic surgery Acupuncture Hearing aids and exams for fitting them Routine foot care You can go to the medicare.gov website and check on the main page if any test , item or service is covered by Medicare .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Have Copays ?
Original Medicare Part A & B do not come with Co-Pays . You are , however , responsible for deductibles and co-insurance . Co-pays are mostly associated with Medicare Advantage Plans and Prescription Drug Plans . The co-pays do have a wide range from one Plan to the next , so it is always a good idea to review the Outline of Coverage for the Plan you have or may be considering . If you have a Medigap Plan -LRB- also known as Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , there is one standardized plan that does have co-pays . With Plan N , the customer is responsible for co-pays for doctor visits . The co-pay will not be more than $ 20 for an office visit . Plan N also requires a $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit . This co-pay is waived if you are admitted into the hospital .
Cymbalta will have different costs with each Part D RX plan or the Rx plans built inherently into Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C plans -RRB- . Each plan has a formulary which tiers the drugs and then ties each tier to a copay . You will not find Cymbalta in a lower copay tier with most carriers as they will all have it listed as a tier 3 or tier 4 medication . There are some plans that have lower copays associated with tier 3 however . Most companies charge a $ 45 to $ 50 copay for a one month supply of a tier 3 drug . There are some plans that have a $ 18 to $ 25 copay for tier three which could save you some money . The last thing to keep in mind is regardless of the copay amount , a drug like Cymbalta is going to push you into the Part D coverage gap `` donut hole '' much faster than a lower cost generic would do .
Original Medicare has deductibles and coinsurance for Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have a Medicare supplement plan N , you will have copay 's for outpatient expenses and ER visits . Plan N copay 's are limited to $ 20 or $ 50 . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan you will have copay 's for most medical services .
Prescriptions are covered under a Part D plan -LRB- prescription drug plan -RRB- or Part C plan -LRB- medicare advantage plan -RRB- . Every plan has a unique formulary that determines what tier each medication is categorized as or if it is even covered by the plan . Typically brand drugs are a tier 3 or higher and have a higher copay when filled at your in-network pharmacy . Some brand drugs have a generic alternative which puts them at a tier 1 or tier 2 which usually has a lower copay . Some plans provide for $ 0 copay for generics or at least a discount on your copays if you use a mail order pharmacy and may allow you to receive up to a 90 day supply of your medications . Be sure to read about any applicable prescription deductibles and coverage gaps/catastrophic gaps -LRB- commonly called ` the donut hole ' -RRB- that may apply to these plans as that may cause the copays to change .
MediGap - or Medicare Supplement - insurance varies by plan and by zip code . There are several plans to choose from : A , B , C , D , F , G K , L , M , N - and yes , these letters stand for something different than Medicare A & B , or Part C or D. Which creates some confusion . But Medicare Part A & B basically only pay 80 % of anything - so the options to help cover all or most of the 20 % is either a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medicare Supplement plan - also known as a MediGap plan , and also labeled with letters . The supplement plans most often sold are Plans F , G and N . An example : Say plan F is $ 150.00 a month - with no copays and virtually no out of pocket limit costs past on to the insured . A plan G may cost $ 100.00 a month , with $ 20.00 copays and still virtually no out of pocket limit costs past on to the insured . Plan G can be a great option to save monthly and have small $ 20.00 copays when you do need to see a physician . It is best to speak with an independent agent who sells both Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplements , so that your education is complete , fair and unbiased . Hope this clarifies ! Belinda www.myseniorventure.com/answers
Original Medicare does not have a donut hole , but Part D -LRB- the prescription drug plan -RRB- does have a donut hole . Simply stated , most Part D drug plans have `` front end '' coverage where benefits are provided for formulary drugs and you have a copay . Once you have exhausted your initial coverage there is a donut hole or corridor deductible where you have only a discount on formulary drugs . Once you get through the donut hole copay 's kick in again .
Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
Medicare Advantage plans are indeed like traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
Medicare Advantage plans range in premium from $ 0 to less than $ 100 per month in most areas . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
There is no `` best '' Medicare Advantage plan . Benefits and premiums vary by zip code and from year to year . The `` best '' plan is the one that fits your needs and budget . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan
There is no `` best '' Medicare Advantage plan . Benefits and premiums vary by zip code and from year to year . The `` best '' plan is the one that fits your needs and budget . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Original Medicare would cover an upper Endoscopy at 80 % of the Medicare allowable amount -LRB- meaning you can only be billed based on the amount Medicare allows for the procedure -RRB- once the Part B deductible of $ 166 has been satisfied for the year . If you have a Medicare supplement , it will cover some or all of the deductible and 20 % based on which sup you have purchased . A Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- Managed Medicare plan -RRB- will have a copay associated with the procedure which varies depending on the company and plan you have . It is usually an Outpatient surgery copay .
Private health insurance plans do indeed cover GP -LRB- General Practitioner -RRB- office visits . Some health insurance plans have in network copay 's for doctor visits -LRB- and higher copay 's for out of network visits -RRB- . If your plan does not have a doctor visit copay you will pay the negotiated rate when you use a network doctor . Your out of pocket cost for using a non-network doctor will be considerably higher .
Not really . Once you have been in the hospital for more than 60 consecutive days there is a daily copay but most of your basic items do not have a Medicare copay . Medicare does have deductibles and coinsurance that can leave you with an unlimited amount of OOP expenses if you have a bad year .
There is no `` best '' plan . The plan that fits your needs and budget is the one that is best for you . Medicare Advantage plans are indeed like traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
There is no `` best '' Advantage plan . The one that fits your needs and budget is the best for you . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . Exceptions are made to the out of network penalty for true medical emergencies . Make sure you understand all details of the policy , especially your out of pocket maximum . The out of pocket limit does not include non-network benefits or Rx . It also does not include any non-covered medical treatment . In most areas less than half the doctors accept ANY Medicare Advantage plans . Even if your doctor does accept Advantage patients they may not participate in your particular plan .
Medicare coverage for Nursing Home is extremely limited . You must be admitted to the hospital for at least three days not counting day of discharge , you must need skilled care , and the reason for your care must be related to the reason for your hospital stay . Medicare will pay all of the first 20 days in a Skilled Nursing Facility . Days 21 through 100 you will have a copay . This year that copay is $ 148 per day . Medicare does not pay for custodial care , which means that unless there is the ability for the persons health to improve by receiving skilled care , Medicare will not pay .
Medicare insurance -LRB- other than `` basic '' Medicare Part A and Part B -RRB- can be anywhere from $ 0 monthly for select Medicare Advantage plans to a few hundred per month for a Medicare supplement plan . Benefits and premiums vary by zip code and from year to year . The `` best '' plan is the one that fits your needs and budget . Medicare Advantage plans are similar to traditional major medical plans in that they have copay 's and deductibles . But the difference stops there . Most Advantage plans have networks . Some networks are local while others are regional . Some Advantage plans only include coverage if you are treated by a network provider while others will include out of network coverage but with a higher -LRB- and usually separate -RRB- deductible , higher copay 's and higher out of pocket . If you stay with original Medicare and buy a supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- your premium will vary by age , zip code , plan design , tobacco use and BMI . Original Medicare with a Medigap plan allows you to use any doctor or hospital anywhere in the country and you never have to worry about being out of network . Your out of pocket is limited in most cases to a few hundred dollars per year for approved Medicare Part A and Part B charges . #MedigapPlanFRates #MedicareSupplementPlanFRates #GeorgiaMedigapPlanFRates #GeorgiaMedicareSupplementPlanFRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Does Suze Orman Recommend Long Term Care Insurance ?
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
This is another one of those should n't you ask Suze about ? Suze Orman believes in term insurance for the most part . Her background is as a stockbroker , not as an insurance agent . Her views are shaped by the industry she started in . After the MEC laws came about in the late 80 's , you could n't find many stockbrokers who recommended anything other than term insurance . Probably the biggest reason behind this recommendation was term insurance freed more money for investments which they got paid on , so it made perfect sense to encourage the purchase of term insurance as it freed short term money for investment . The problem is when your investments do n't earn 12 % every year and year after year , things may not work out the way you want . You may find you need life insurance longer than you thought . The real problem with following any financial guru , even if their advice is sound , is what happens when things go off path 10 % or 20 % ? Does the plan collapse ? Was all the investment return earned just you could pay a much higher premium in your old age because you bought term as a young person ? It 's an odd thing to think about in planning but simply ask what happens if you 're wrong ? How much damage hits you if you guessed wrong about the future ? This means taking a broader approach to planning , spreading risk and return to have things work out in different markets . A racing scull is faster than a rowboat , but when a wave hits and flips the racing scull over , but rocks the rowboat , which was a better choice for the body of water ?
Term life insurance is a specific product for a specific need . Unlike various forms of permanent life insurance , term is designed to expire before you do . Term life insurance may be perfect for needs with a defined time limit . You can use it to cover debts such as a mortgage that is to be paid off in a specified number of years such as 15 or 30 years . Term life insurance could be used to satisfy a divorce decree where child support or even alimony -LRB- with a time limit -RRB- is required . Some business obligations are also situations where a term life insurance policy might be a good idea . But if you have a permanent need , such as for estate planning purposes -LRB- including estate liquidity -RRB- , term life insurance may not be your best choice . Suze Orman is not an agent , does not know you or your circumstances . She has no idea how much life insurance you should have any more than Jay Leno would . Suze Orman is not accountable by any means for poor advice she may offer regarding your insurance needs .
I do n't know or watch Suze Orman so I ca n't really state why she likes term life insurance over cash value life insurance . I do know that Suze Orman , Dave Ramsey and other talk radio types make blanket statements that do not suit every ones situation . The thing to remember their advice is free and you get what you pay for . Use a trusted independent advisor when purchasing life insurance to be sure you get the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
Suze Orman recommends term life insurance over participating whole life insurance , which she has a disdain for . She as well as Dave Ramsey are huge proponents of term life insurance . And for financial liabilities that are time certain events , thats just fine . Generally you can only recommend what you understand . That in and of itself can eliminate your opining on an area you just dont understand .
Suze Orman usually does not recommend Whole Life Insurance because she feels that Life Insurance is not needed in Retirement . In reality , most retirees have a need for at least a basic amount Life Insurance , if not more . And Term Insurance will eventually become unaffordable because of age . So most people at least have a small need for Whole Life Insurance , or some other type of Permanent Life Insurance .
Suze Orman says that Term Life Insurance is the only type of life insurance to buy . She recommends buying a length of term that suits the need for which it was purchased . E.g. . If protecting a child who is 13 , purchase a 10 year term policy . She says to buy 20 times the amount of annual income that your dependents would need to survive without you . That way they can invest the principal and live off the interest .
To say that Suze Orman is not a fan of participating whole life insurance for death benefit coverage is an understatement . She has several online videos castigating the product as a consumer rip off . For most people , Suze believes in term life insurance and investing the difference in price between the two products .
Suze Orman seems to have softened her position on annuities . In the past she has be extremely critical of annuities . But recent postings on the Internet suggest she has modified her position if not her overall tone . Theres a piece on the Internet called Truth About Annuities , apparently authored by Suze , where she gives some latitude in their use in certain scenarios .
Whether it 's Suze Orman or any of the other `` gurus '' that discuss life insurance for the majority of people , you must have a point of view that defines you with an audience . Orman is life a stopped watch , she is exactly right , but not all the time . The problem with other types of coverage is that many people spent money on whole life at the behest of an agent when that is not the appropriate type of coverage . Beware anyone that tells you what to purchase without knowing anything about your particular situation .
`` No well-planned retirement should be without long term care -LRB- LTC -RRB- insurance . It is the very cornerstone of retirement security . '' - Suze Orman . Suze addresses LTC describes how to safeguard your financial future . This is one of the few areas Suze and the insurance industry agree on something .
Suze Orman likes Term Life Insurance because it is a low cost way of protecting your family if you should die while they are dependent on your income . The product is easy to understand , is straightforward , and if you should die before the term is up , the death benefit is paid tax free to your beneficiaries .
Suze Orman is in favor or Term Life Insurance because it is a low cost way to provide a hefty amount of financial protection for a family . She advocates investing and saving on the side , so that your family need not be dependent on life insurance in your later years .
Suze Orman is against Whole Life insurance because she feels that people can do better by buying Term Life insurance and investing the rest . Technically , it is true that certain stocks or other investments will give a far better return on one 's dollar . But when one considers the risk and taxation on those types of investments , plus the fact that a large amount of medical expenses or just lack of self control might deplete one 's savings in the later years , buying Whole Life insurance can make sense for some people . No cookie cutter approach fits everyone .
Suze Orman has a piece posted online called Truth About Annuities . About half way down the post she addresses variable annuities . Her explanation has a few mischaracterizations , but all in all she lays it out in an understandable manner . She seems to question the economics of tax deferral , but her treatment of variable annuities isnt as negative as some of her 2009 and 2010 YouTube videos . WEBSITELINK
No , Suze Orman does not like variable annuities . She does like single premium deferred annuities , and sometimes likes medical annuities for older persons . However , she does not like variable annuities . She feels they are too complicated and that the fees are too high , among other things .
Clark Howard goes along with the general theory that you need 10 to 20 times your income with term life insurance . Most radio personalities that give financial advice have to be very generic and not deal with specifics or they would bore everyone to death . Suze Orman , Clark Howard and Dave Ramsey are all popular personalities that agree on this point .
Suzi Orman is one of many people who recommend buying term life insurance and investing the difference . If this is done properly and IF the investments do well , you can come out way ahead that way . The problem is , many people buy term and spend the difference . Then at the end of their term they become uninsured and often have health problems and are very expensive to insure . Suzi is a financial entertainer . You can pick up good things from the financial entertainers but also a lot of things that do n't apply to you .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How To Deduct Long Term Care Insurance From Taxes ?
Very generally speaking , if you are an individual who is paying your own long term care premiums , you would add the premiums to your other medical expenses for that year , and itemize those medical expenses as you would normally do . If you are self employed , you are allowed to deduct 100 % of your long term care premiums as a business expense . There are many additions and variations of this , but this is how to deduct long term care insurance in two situations .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
Technically , no . Medicare was designed to help the elderly pay for acute sickness and accidents from whichone can heal relatively quickly . It does not cover chronic illness or prolonged rehabilitation from an accident . However , Medicare will provide payment of costs for some `` short-term '' recovery for the elderly that are enrolled in Medicare part A & B . There are prequalifications and limitations to what it will pay for , how much it will pay , the type of care it will pay for , and for how long -LRB- maximum of 100 days -RRB- . Payment for long-term care is usually paid out of pocket , or by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . To receive payment for care from the latter , one must be `` impoverished '' as defined by the state that they live in , and they usually must be in a facility -LRB- Medicaid/Medical only pay a few hundred dollars a month of home care -RRB- . The only other solution to the problem of paying for long-term care , either at home or in a facility , is long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- . This sector of the health insurance industry is in a bit of turmoil right now and if you have decided that you want to explore LTCi , make sure that you work with someone that is a specialist in this area . There are an infinite number of designs in coverage which can vary the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- by thousands of dollars a year . Also , be sure that you are working with agents that only work with the best LTCi companies in the industry , those that have strong financials , high ratings , and are committed to the field . The most important thing is to have a plan . Your plan may or may not include LTCi . But , if it does , buy no later than your mid-fifties as the price really starts to climb after that . Dont depend on Medicare for the payment of long-term care costs .
Qualified Long Term Care Insurance -LRB- TQ Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is long term care insurance that has favorable tax treatment , as determined by the federal government in 1997 . Nearly all long term care policies sold now are qualified plans . It allows your premium and nonreimbursed benefits to be counted as a medical expense on your tax return , and allows you to receive long term care benefits tax free .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Homeowners Insurance Cover Shingles ?
Shingles is an awful disease and often adults will get Shingles later in life . The recovery time is longer than you expect and it is certainly a disease to avoid if possible . About half of the population gets Shingles before they turn 80 . Homeowner 's insurance , of course , does not pay for it . However , if you are referring to shingles on your roof ... yes , if part of an approved claim , they are covered ! Obviously , if your roof is damaged in a tornado , you may need new shingles . Not the disease though .
Roofing and or siding shingles are considered to be a part of the over all structure of a home and therefore , if damaged or destroyed by a covered peril in your policy , would be included in that coverage . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy as well as any limitations to gain the best understanding of what is and is not covered and to what extent . Naturally , any covered loss will be settled subject to your policy deductible along with all other specifics of the policy terms . Be sure to find out if your policy includes a replacement guarantee loss settlement in that conversation . Bundled and stored shingles would be considered Personal Property and thus covered under that portion of your policy as opposed to the dwelling portion .
Homeowners insurance does not cover defective workmanship . Now in the case of your shingles if you had a wind storm for example and water leaked in your home the insurance company would pay for the damage to the dwelling . Upon discovery you have faulty shingles , you the homeowner , would be obligated to replace those shingles , not the insurance company . In pretty much every case I have seen if the shingles are not replaced you would be non renewed by the insurance compnay as the insurance company does not want to pay another claim due to faulty shingles .
Shingles is an awful disease and often adults will get Shingles later in life . The recovery time is longer than you expect and it is certainly a disease to avoid if possible . About half of the population gets Shingles before they turn 80 . Homeowner 's insurance , of course , does not pay for it . However , if you are referring to shingles on your roof ... yes , if part of an approved claim , they are covered ! Obviously , if your roof is damaged in a tornado , you may need new shingles . Not the disease though .
The shingles vaccine shot is generally covered under your prescription coverage . Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug plans generally cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . Medicare Part A -LRB- your hospital insurance -RRB- and Part B -LRB- your physician insurance -RRB- do not cover the shingles vaccine shot .
Zostavax is not a cancer drug , but used as a vaccine for Herpes Zoster -LRB- shingles -RRB- . Zostavax is the only drug licensed in the US that is approved for reducing the risk of shingles . Medicare does cover the shingles vaccine -LRB- Zostavax -RRB- under Medicare Part D. Your doctor may administer the vaccine but can not bill Medicare for the drug .
Yes and no ! The typical multi-peril homeowners policy water covers damage caused by rain under specific circumstances such as water windblown thru the roof shingles or a hole in the wall or roof caused by lightning . However if it rains to the degree that water collects on the ground and enter your home thru doors or windows , the homeowners policy does not cover it . That would require a flood insurance policy . If it rains and your sump pump fails and water fills your basement , most homeowners policies will NOT cover the loss , though many companies offers optional sump pump failure coverage . Consult your insurance professional for the details that apply in your state .
The `` bottom line '' cost of shingles would vary depending on the severity of your condition , your insurance benefits , and where you seek treatment . Most forms of shingles , which have been known to reoccur for years in some cases , are treated with medications . As long as you are insured , the cost for your treatment would be equal to the cost of your doctor visits combined with the copayment for your medications . If you are uninsured , you can find a doctor to see you for less than $ 60 in most cases , or consider trying telemedicine , where a visit can cost $ 30 or less . Once your medication has been prescribed , try www.GoodRx.com to find the lowest priced available in your local area for the medication you need . For a minor case of shingles , you can often be treated for less than $ 100 total . Major cases , that reoccur for years , can cost many times that amount .
Medicare Part A and Part B do not cover the shingles vaccine . The vaccine is covered under Part D , prescription drug coverage . Contact your drug plan to see what your co-pay would be for the shingles vaccine . Medicare Part B will cover a yearly flu shot and the pneumonia vaccine .
Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine . It ` sgenerally covered under your prescription coverage . Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug plans will generally cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Roofing and or siding shingles are considered to be a part of the over all structure of a home and therefore , if damaged or destroyed by a covered peril in your policy , would be included in that coverage . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy as well as any limitations to gain the best understanding of what is and is not covered and to what extent . Naturally , any covered loss will be settled subject to your policy deductible along with all other specifics of the policy terms . Be sure to find out if your policy includes a replacement guarantee loss settlement in that conversation . Bundled and stored shingles would be considered Personal Property and thus covered under that portion of your policy as opposed to the dwelling portion .
Unfortunately no , Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine . This vaccine is generally covered under a Part D prescription drug plan - most Part D plans will cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Keep in mind that your homeowners policy is not a maintenance policy . Similar to your auto insurance not providing coverage for new tires or new brakes , your homeowners insurance policy will not pay for a new roof if the roof is worn out and has just deteriorated over time . The life of a typical composition shingle roof is anywhere from 20 - 30 years and needs to be replaced if it is falling apart due to wear and tear . This is very different from a claim scenario where your roof sustains sudden and accidental damage from a storm -LRB- i.e. wind or hail -RRB- . If this is the case , your roof can be covered under your homeowners insurance and depending on the extent of the damage could potentially be covered for replacement . Everyone should consult their agent to check the language of the policy and weigh all options because when you submit a claim it is normal for your rates to go up because of a loss of discount and / or a rating surcharge . -- @MooneyInsurance
Yes , Aetna 's Medicare Part D plans covers shingles vaccine . If you do not have a supplemental prescription drug plan or Medicare Advantage Plan , Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine , however . You must be sure to have your shot within your PPO , if specified , to save costs .
Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine but if can be covered under a Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plan . The amount you pay for the shingles vaccine will depend on the copay of your Part D Prescription Drug Plan .
The shingles shot isnt covered by Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- . Generally , Medicare prescription drug plans -LRB- Part D -RRB- cover all commercially-available vaccines -LRB- like the shingles shot -RRB- needed to prevent illness . Zostavax -LRB- PF -RRB- is a Tier 4 medication under all three Humana Stand Alone PDPs Humana Walmart PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Preferred Rx PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Enhanced PDP has a 44 % coinsurance -LRB- this plan has no deductible -RRB-
That is a great question ! Check with your agent to be certain , but you should be covered for the repairs . How bad was the damage ? If it 's just a few shingles , and the estimate is less than your deductible amount , you are wiser to not file a claim , as you 'd end up paying for it anyway , and you will spare yourself the chance of an increased premium as a result of the filed claim . You also may have problems because of the reason for the lost shingles . Hurricane damage , or tornado damage may not be covered with out a rider , where you live . Best bet ? Get a repair estimate , compare it to your deductible amount , and proceed from there . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
The Zostavax vaccine , or Herpes Zoster vaccine , is for the prevention of shingles in older persons , those whose health may be fragile , or anyone who wants it . Zostavax vaccine is covered by Medicare Part D , not Medicare Part B . You are responsible for co-pays . It is usually less expensive to get the shingles vaccine at a pharmacy .
homeowner 's insurance will pay for a new roof if the damage is a result of a covered claim . For example , if a tornado causes damage to the point where your roof needs replacing , it will be covered . If a few shingles are damaged and they can be replaced instead of an entire roof , that will also be covered .
Medicare Part D will pay for shingles shots . The Medicare Prescription Drug Plan , or a Medicare Advantage Plan with Prescription Drug -LRB- MA-PD -RRB- , are used for shingles vaccinations . These will pay both the cost of the vaccine and the cost of administering it , when using a Medicare approved provider .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Wind Damage To The Roof ?
Generally speaking , your homeowners insurance will coverage wind damage . There are instances where this wo n't be the case , but there would normally be a specific exclusion in your policy that says it does n't cover wind damage . I would recommend speaking to an insurance professional to ensure that the damage will be covered by your policy .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Homeowners insurance typically does cover your roof , whether comprised of common asphalt shingles or another material . However , policies may differ in HOW your roof is covered . Some policies cover the roof for actual cash value -LRB- market value - depreciation = actual cash value -RRB- . While others have a guaranteed amount of coverage . Most people do not know that their deductible may be higher for wind orhail damage claims -LRB- the most common perilswhich lead to an insurance claim on a roof -RRB- . Policies typically have an option of a flat deductible , meaningthe same deductible is paid regardless of the type of claim . As an example let 's say you have a flat $ 500 deductible . Whether there is afire claim or wind damage claim , you pay $ 500 for your deductible . Many policies have the option , and some even require , a higher deductible for wind/hail claims.For example , you may have a $ 1,000 deductible for wind/hail and $ 500 deductible AOP -LRB- all other perils -RRB- . Want to know what coverage you have ? Check out your policy or ask your agent today !
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
It will , but it also depends upon where the water came from . If there is a heavy wind and rain storm and the wind damages your roof , causing rain water to leak in and damage the inside of your home , there will be coverage for that . If on the other hand , the heavy rain does not causedirect damage to your home , but raises the water table in your property , which causeswater to leak into your basement , it is possible that there would not be any coverage for that because ground waterdamage is usually excluded under a homeowners policy . Be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverge for failure of any sewars or drainage systems like curtain drains or sump pumps . If you have such coverage , then you will be more likely to be covered if your basement fills with water as a result of any failure .
Unless you have a roof exclusion on your homeowners policy a roof is covered for the perils of the policy . Perils would include fire , wind , hail , weight of snow , lightning , falling objects , vandalism and potential water damage if caused by a bursting pipe . The homeowners insurance policy does not cover normal wear and tear . Also wind in some areas may have an exclusion or a separate deductible .
Roofing shingles as well as siding are considered to be a part of your dwelling and thus would be covered for damage caused by a covered peril . Wear and tear for example is not a covered peril whereas damage caused by wind , wind driven rain , lightening etc are . Any covered damage to your home would be handled unser the specific terms and conditions of your policy . So talk to your Insurance Professional about this . Give them the specifics about your loss and be sure to ask any and all questions that come to mind .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover normal wear and tear of any kind , so if the roof is just old this is not a covered peril . Should the roof be damaged by a covered peril then the roof would either be repaired or replaced minus your deductible . A covered peril may include wind , hail , falling objects , fire to name a few .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Keep in mind that your homeowners policy is not a maintenance policy . Similar to your auto insurance not providing coverage for new tires or new brakes , your homeowners insurance policy will not pay for a new roof if the roof is worn out and has just deteriorated over time . The life of a typical composition shingle roof is anywhere from 20 - 30 years and needs to be replaced if it is falling apart due to wear and tear . This is very different from a claim scenario where your roof sustains sudden and accidental damage from a storm -LRB- i.e. wind or hail -RRB- . If this is the case , your roof can be covered under your homeowners insurance and depending on the extent of the damage could potentially be covered for replacement . Everyone should consult their agent to check the language of the policy and weigh all options because when you submit a claim it is normal for your rates to go up because of a loss of discount and / or a rating surcharge . -- @MooneyInsurance
Repair to a roof can be covered if the damage was caused by a covered claim such as wind or hail . However , if the roof is old and needs repair due to the fact that it is just getting old , it will not be covered under your homeowner 's insurance . And it may be time to get a new roof !
A general rule of thumb is that Homeowners ' Insurance Policy is not a maintenance agreement . So if you are asking if you can have your insurance pay to replace your roof due to age or wear and tear , the answer is going to be no . However , talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Discuss the covered perils as they relate to damage that your roof may have sustained . For example , wind , hail , weight of ice and snow are all usually covered perils in a Homeowners policy . Therefore , if your roof was damaged as a result of these or any other perils named in your policy , then you will find that there is coverage . The settlement will , of course , be subject to your property deductible .
Great question . If you are asking what is ... the cost ... for a homeowner 's policy , this may help you . Home policies are rated based on age of home , type of construction , occupancy and location . In my state , Florida , the distance to water is very important as well as the type of roof . There are two styles , gabled roofs -LRB- which are popular in the Northern States -RRB- and hip roof -LRB- which is a newer style and has better resistance to wind . -LRB- We have hurricanes here . -RRB-
Homeowners insurance will cover water damage from a roof leak if the roof sustained damage from a recent storm and the damage to the roof resulted in damage inside the home . If the roof has issues that have gone unrepaired , water damage in this circumstance would not be covered . The roof damage and the water damage must have occured at the same time . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
Typically mold is not covered since mold is produced by continual water penetration that is either undetected or ignored . When water damage is covered on a policy , it is usually only covered if the original cause of loss is covered . You state you were told the original cause of loss was wind damage . If the water damage occurred at the same time , and was a factor of the wind damage -LRB- both happened during the same storm -RRB- , then depending on the type of policy you have -LRB- not the insurance carrier , but the actual policy -RRB- , you may have coverage . There are two types of policies - Open Peril and Named Peril . This is the first item you need to know about the policy you hold . On an Open Peril policy , all perils -LRB- specific cause of loss -RRB- are covered unless they are specifically excluded . On a Named Peril policy , all perils are excluded unless they are specifically listed as covered . On most policies , water damage is listed as excluded , unless specific conditions are met . For example , the policies my company writes in my area covers for `` accidental direct , distinct and demonstrable physical water damage of covered property from direct contact with water , but only if the water results from : '' and then goes on to list what conditions need to be present . In my opinion , unless the water damage was specifically caused by wind damage , and both losses were reported at the same time , you might not have coverage for these items . And most likely not the mold damage regardless of the cause .
Unless the roof was excluded from your originalhomeownerspolicy which is rare . -LRB- Possiblyfrom poor conditions when the insurance policy was first obtained -RRB- . A roof is covered for certain perils of a homeowners policy . If you carry special form you would be covered for Fire , wind , hail , falling objects , smoke , vandalism . The roof would not be covered for normal wear and tear which is the responsibility of the homeowner to maintain and upkeep . Specific details of a potential loss should be discussed with your agent as they would befamiliarwith your policy and specificcoverage 's .
It may if your roof was damaged by a covered incident less your policy deductible . Many homeowners policies have a different deductilbe for wind , hail , or roof claims . Please remember every policy is different . Read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be .
If you are referring to the roof then yes home would cover shingles for the perils of the policy . Keep in mind , wear and tear -LRB- age and deterioration -RRB- are not perils of a homeowners insurance policy . Coverage would be such things as fire , wind -LRB- assuming there is not wind exclusion -RRB- falling objects , collapse due to snow . If you have a specific question or situation please re-post the question or contact your local agent for clarification .
A homeowners policy covers damage caused by a covered peril . The loss to a roof is covered when it is the result of a fire , for example . It is not covered if it is the result of age and deterioration as those arent covered perils . When a roof is adjusted for a damage loss , many companies treat a roof on a cash value basis . This is because the life of the roof is shorter than the life of the remainder of the building . So if a roof is half way through its life and suffers a covered loss , it is likely to be covered to 50 % of the cost of replacing the roof .
Damage to your roof is typically only covered if the damage is caused by a covered loss -LRB- typically fire , smoke , or very strong winds -RRB- and even then is subject to policy limits and possibly a deductible . Please read your policy completely to know what coverage is provided and what exclusions it may contain .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance If I Have Had A Stroke ?
Getting life insurance after having a stroke is challenging , but usually can be done . If the stroke has been over two years ago , there are a number of simplified issue policies that will offer coverage . If the stroke was within one or two years , guaranteed issue policies will cover stroke , if available in your state . Most of these types of policies have a minimum issue age of 40-50 years old . For simplified issue , you must be able to do ADL 's indpendently ; for guaranteed issue , you do not . If the stroke was very mild and not repeat problems , some medically underwritten policies are available . Consult an agent or agency experienced in impaired risk life insurance to shop the policy for you .
Guaranteed and simplified issued may be available by several life insurance companies for depending how long ago the potential insured experienced a stroke and how severe it was . Depending upon the insureds history and the severity of the stroke , fully underwritten policies may be an option to explore .
That is a great question ! I 'm glad that you asked it , because I believe that you are representative of a lot of people that fear health issues will keep them from getting life insurance , like pre-existing conditions did with health insurance . Many people are n't aware that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- removed that obstacle , so the perception that having a health issue gets in the way of getting , or affording insurance . Life insurance qualifications take a close look at your health issues , but are n't as strict as you might think . Most insurers will look at your high blood pressure , cholesterol levels , or diabetes , and if they are being controlled by medications , will not count that against you . It 's when these issues are n't being managed that you will have trouble getting or affording the coverage . Many companies will also have a `` look back '' period , where it is only within that period -LRB- usually 2-5 years -RRB- that major health issues are considered . So if you 'd had say , a stroke , but it was 10 years ago , and you 've been on medications and have had great health since , a good independent agent can help you find a policy that wo n't count that stroke against you . I am pleased that you were so careful with being truthful with your answers , that says a lot about your character and honesty . You rock !! I hope that helps you feel better about the question - they are looking for big things , not the little ones , but if you are still worried , just ask your agent , or drop me a line , and if I can help I will . Thanks for asking !
If you have had one stroke that had minimal effects and several years have passed since having the stroke , you may be able to get a medically underwritten policy of any amount for which you financially qualify , with immediate death benefit . If your stroke impacted your health enough that you needed to go on Disability but you are still able to do all your own activities of daily living and walk without personal assistance -LRB- can or walker is OK -RRB- , then there are a number of simplified issue policies that may or not be graded , that you can get . If your stroke caused you to require use of a wheelchair , home health or nursing home care -LRB- inability to do your own ADL 's -RRB- , or causes significant confusion , then guaranteed issue policies are available to most people . These are more restrictive in features than the other policies , but are available for final expense purposes . Contact an impaired risk underwriting agency that carries all these types of policies and understands life insurance underwriting for stroke , and you will get your best price .
Did you know that this type of policy was first created by Dr. Marius Bernard , in 1983 in South Africa ? Dr. Bernard has a famous brother Dr. Christian Bernard who preformed the first heart transplant . Dr. Bernard saw that his brother was saving lives but destroying them financially . Group critical illness insurance is a supplemental health insurance program which is essentially a pool of money that will be given to you in lump sums for various illnesses such as stroke , heart aliments , paralysis , severe burns etc. . Depending on your illness you can receive different amounts of that pool of money . As an example , you could buy an amount of $ 50,000 which you could receive the entire amount if you had a severe stroke or a portion if you have a heart attack . The point is that once you receive the entire $ 50,000 your policy would be cancelled as all benefit had been paid out . Is it a good policy to buy ? Well I own one , with the idea being to make up deductibles and co-pays , if I have a covered problem , which are n't paid by my health insurance policy . Some other reasons to buy are loss of income or a quick remodel of your home if you need to use wheel chairs to get around .
Getting life insurance after having a stroke is challenging , but usually can be done . If the stroke has been over two years ago , there are a number of simplified issue policies that will offer coverage . If the stroke was within one or two years , guaranteed issue policies will cover stroke , if available in your state . Most of these types of policies have a minimum issue age of 40-50 years old . For simplified issue , you must be able to do ADL 's indpendently ; for guaranteed issue , you do not . If the stroke was very mild and not repeat problems , some medically underwritten policies are available . Consult an agent or agency experienced in impaired risk life insurance to shop the policy for you .
Unfortunately , persons who have a high risk of having the need to collect on long term care benefits may be unable to get long term care insurance . E.g. . If they have already had a stroke , or have had an amputation due to diabetes , have Alzheimers , or have MS , they probably can not get long term care insurance .
You can get life insurance if you have high blood pressure . The factor that insurance companies look for when it comes to high blood pressure is how many medications that you take to keep it under control . If your doctor has you on more than one prescription for high blood pressure , it means that it is not under control . When your blood pressure is not under control , it can lead to a stroke . Most of the time , there are limited opportunities for insurance if you have had a stroke recently . However , there are easy issue policies that dont ask about how many medications you are taking . These policies usually have a higher premium because they ask less health questions . Most insurance companies will also put a cap on the benefit for these policies . Make sure that your agent knows your complete health situation so that she can find you a policy that you will be able to qualify for . There are definitely a lot of options for you when you have high blood pressure . If you are on several medications for blood pressure , talk to your doctor and see how you would be able to get down to one . Most of the time he will suggest that you diet and exercise . It is a serious matter so listen to what your doctor is telling you .
Critical Illness insurance is a specified disease based coverage meant to provide a tax free , lump sum face amount up diagnosis of a covered illness.There are several insurance carriers who offer this coverage and as you can imagine , each carrier covers different conditions . That said , there are a select few States where the Department of Insurance has not approved Critical Illness insurance for sale within that specific State . Anyway , of all the conditions covered ... the most important are Heart Attack , Cancer and Stroke . Not to downplay the seriousness of other diagnosed conditions but nearly 80 % of all claims that will get paid from these policies are due to those three conditions . Each carrier offers coverage for other conditions . Some carriers offer coverage for 21 different conditions , while other carriers may limit their coverage to 4 or 5 conditions . Please understand that when looking into Critical Illness coverage , the most important thing to look for is not just what conditions are covered but how they are covered . The benefit definitions are a major consideration and it is `` critical '' -LRB- pardon the pun -RRB- to know the benefit definitions prior to purchase . There are carriers who provide a stroke benefit but will not pay a benefit unless the neurological deficit of the stroke persists for 30 days ... whereas there area few carriers who will pay a stroke benefit once the neurological deficit persists 96 hours . I hope this helped answer your question .
Yes , there is life insurance that will cover someone with a stroke and diabetes . Since your stroke was over 2 years ago , there are some simplified issue policies that you can get , as long as you can do all your own ADL 's -LRB- activities of daily living -RRB- . If you are unable to bathe , dress , etc on your own , there are guaranteed issue policies that you can get . While some agents may suggest going the route with medical underwriting , my experience is that this option will not be available to you due to the combination of conditions . I hate to see people go through an extensive underwriting process , only to be declined . You will know the minute you apply whether or not the policies I mentioned will accept you . Sometimes that shot in the arm means as much as the coverage itself .
There are many kinds of life insurance policies , some harder to get than others . At our office , we start with the hardest to get -LRB- least expensive -RRB- and work our way through the choices until we find the best price and policy for which our clients will qualify . In states that offer it , guaranteed issue life insurance is the easiest to get , and most expensive . But it also has age limitations , so not everyone can get it . Not counting guaranteed issue life insurance or simplified issue life insurance -LRB- both good options for those who can not get anything else -RRB- , here are some things that could keep you from getting medically underwritten Life Insurance : 1 . A serious health condition that is not , or can not be , controlled . 2 . AIDS or HIV positive 3 . Drug or alcohol treatment in the last year 4 . Current or recent felony or probation 5 . Cancer , heart attack or stroke within the past year 6 . Having had some tests done to determine if you have a health condition , with the results not yet back . Or a surgery coming up shortly ; most companies will postpone until the surgery is over . 7 . Not having US citizenship , work VISA or Green Card 8 . Suspended drivers license 9 . Cognitive impairment 10 . A child under 20 with a serious health condition , whether controlled or not 11 . Being in a wheelchair and/or needing assistance to do activities of daily living such as dressing or bathing 12 . Being on oxygen or dialysis 13 . Being diagnosed as terminally ill Again , there are options for most situations , even those above , if you get the right type of policy . An agency that understands impaired risk underwriting , and that carries many different types of life insurance , is your best bet for finding a policy when you have a challenging health or risk history .
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
I can give you some insight based on my own experience . A number of years ago , I had a client with a history of heart disease . He was a young guy in his early 40s . Unfortunately , by that age he had already suffered several heart attacks . Every year he would ask me to go to market and see if I could get him an additional policy . Of course , I would disclose his heart history to every new carrier . They in turn would do their due diligence and review all his medical records before approving his application . Everything was on the up and up . I did succeed in getting him additional coverage . As you can imagine , he had to pay extra due to his medical history . But for him it was worth every penny . I guess he kind of had a feeling the big one was coming . Sure enough , after I had sold him about the fifth the policy , he did have another heart attack . It was a bad one , and he had to go into surgery . He died on the operating table . As the broker , I expedited all the claims . One of them was shortly after the policy has been put into force . You can imagine how the insurance company took a close look at that claim . I was very confident that things would go smoothly because I had gone through full disclosure , and the carrier was fully aware of his medical history . I knew it , and they knew it . Nothing to hide . The net result was that it took less than a week of additional time for the benefit check to be issued .
AARP has a number of policies , so the questions asked depend on which policy you are apply for . But one that has three health questions is AARP 's term policy , which Larry described . Here are those questions at this point in time : 1 . In the past 2 years , have you had treatment or medication for or been diagnosed by a doctor as having heart trouble , stroke , cancer , lung disease or disorder , diabetes , liver or kidney disease , AIDS , AIDS Related Complex , or immune system disorder ? 2 . In the past 2 years , for any condition , have you been admitted to or confined in a hospital , sanitarium , nursing home , extended care or special treatment facility ? 3 . In the past 3 months , have you consulted a doctor or had treatment , medication or diagnostic tests of any type ? -LRB- Note : You are not required to report negative AIDS or HIV tests -RRB- .
At this time , AARP 's three health questions for their term insurance are : 1 . In the past 2 years , have you had treatment or medication for or been diagnosed by a doctor as having heart trouble , stroke , cancer , lung disease or disorder , diabetes , liver or kidney disease , AIDS , AIDS Related Complex , or immune system disorder ? 2 . In the past 2 years , for any condition , have you been admitted to or confined in a hospital , sanitarium , nursing home , extended care or special treatment facility ? 3 . In the past 3 months , have you consulted a doctor or had treatment , medication or diagnostic tests of any type ? -LRB- Note : You are not required to report negative AIDS or HIV tests -RRB- .
Look at the people you know . How many people do you know who have had a stroke , heart attack , or other critical illness that will affect them the rest of their lives . Critical illness coverage provides funds to pay for deductibles and copays , cost of medication , helps with rehab costs , and helps provide for lost income . If you had a heart attack and could n't work how long would you be able to meet your expenses ?
Term Life Insurance does not have cash value or the ability to take policy loans , like Permanent -LRB- Indexed/Universal or Whole -RRB- Life . However , there are several major carriers that offer Living Benefit -LRB- Term or Permanent -RRB- policies that will accelerate up to 100 % of the death benefit , depending upon severity of illness , in case of Critical Illness -LRB- Cancer , Heart Attack , Stroke , Major Organ Transplant , Paralysis , etc. -RRB- ; Chronic Illness ; Terminal Illness ; or Death . Accelerated funds can be used for any purpose , such as : medical bills , mortgage payments , household expenses , lost income , long term care , etc. . And , the premiums are comparable to any other policy that only pay a death benefit . I have had multiple clients receive $ 50K - $ 250K after developing a serious illness . It is normally the only Life Insurance I recommend to clients .
There seems to be lots of questions revolving around `` how much insurance do I need '' . Without having a crystal ball , it 's impossible to answer . Critical Illness generally encompasses heart attack , stroke , cancer , renal failure , etc. . If that happens , you will have extra expense -LRB- out-of-pocket expenses , possible travel , etc -RRB- . But will you also have lost income?Approximately 65 % ofbankruptcies are due to medical bills . And about 60 % of the people that went bankrupt HAD HEALTH INSURANCE !
Yes , you can ! I have done it for people . Heres a quick testimonial : a man contacted me who needed life insurance to indemnify a business loan . He had had open heart surgery several years before , and was having a really tough time getting an offer . I developed a portfolio of quote information about him , and went to market on his behalf . It didnt take too long to find out what the chief obstacle for him was : inconsistent follow-ups . The surgery had taken place in another state , and there he had a cardiologist he liked . However , he had since moved , and had not yet found a replacement physician . So he didnt bother to get a follow up . No underwriter in his right mind could make an offer without knowing his current status . I was able to persuade him that I had a good chance of getting an offer if he had good follow-ups . -LRB- Of course , from a medical point of view , he should have had follow-ups anyway . -RRB- He went ahead and connected with a local cardiologist , and had all the necessary testing done . The results were good enough to get him a decent offer , and his business loan came through . A happy ending .
Insurance Carriers have experienced higher claims and losses , due to increased longevity , chronic illness survival rates and cost of care . As a result , 12 of the top 20 carriers have dropped out of the market in the past 4-5 years . In addition , all carriers have had huge rate increases and/or offered clients a cash buy-out option to cancel older policies . Newer policies have been re-designed and re-priced to account for increased LTC expenses . In most cases , I recommend Living Benefit Life that will accelerate up to 100 % of the face value -LRB- depending upon severity of illness -RRB- , in case of : Critical Illness -LRB- Cancer , Heart Attack , Stroke , Major Organ Transplant , etc. -RRB- ; Chronic Illness ; Disability ; Terminal Illness ; or Death . This allows the client to have one policy with guaranteed level premiums that can provide access to funds while they are alive or in case of death .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does AAA Auto Insurance Cover Rental Cars ?
All auto insurance can provide you reimbursement for auto rentals ONLY IF you get that endorsement on your policy . The typical reimbursement for rental cars is $ 20/day up to $ 600 total . Most insurance companies will let you increase this up to around $ 50/day and $ 1,500 total . There is no standardized wording for this endorsement , either . I have seen it called `` rental reimbursement , '' `` rental coverage , '' `` rental guarantee . '' So , when you are looking through your policy to see if you have some type of rental coverage you need to look carefully .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
AM Best S&P Moody 's Fitch Comdex 1 Teachers Ins & Ann Assoc A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 2 Northwestern Mutual Life Ins A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 3 Massachusetts Mutual Life Ins A + + AA + Aa2 AA + 98 4 New York Life Ins Co A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 5 New York Life Ins & Ann A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
You can get renter 's insurance through the AAA insurance agency , but your AAA membership does not automatically include renter 's insurance . You can contact AAA or another independent insurance agent and they can compare quotes among several different carriers . It is often cheaper to purchase both renters and auto insurance through the same company as they will provide discounts for multiple policies .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
The insurance company you currently have your auto insurance with may extend coverage to a rental car . If so you do have the option of waiving the coverage offered by the rental car agency . I recommend you contact your agent to verify if your coverage applies to a rental car since not all polices will extend to rental cars . Also depending on the state you are in there are advantages of purchasing the rental cars insurance . For example if you have a solo car accident the damage will be picked up by the rental car agency and not your own insurance carrier thereby avoiding any potential points that may apply . But again , I strongly suggest you contact your agent if you are not sure that your current insurance carrier will extend coverage to a rental car .
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
Rental car insurance is available from rental car agencies . If you own an insured car the insurance from that car extends to a rental car which means that purchasing the coverage from the rental agency is not necessary . If you do not own a car , it is possible to purchase non-owned auto insurance which would eliminate the requirement for buying liability insurance from the rental agency . You would still need physical damage coverage .
Yes , AAA does offer term life insurance directly to consumers . They have a rating of A - from A.M.Best , the life insurance rating company . However , unlike homeowners or auto coverage , no carrier can offer a discount for life insurance . You will find many carriers less expensive and with higher financial ratings than AAA . Find a good independent life insurance agent that can help with your coverage .
AAA while being best known for its ' auto towing services and for those of us old enough to remember , their tripticket map service , does indeed sell term insurance . However their are many carriers with higher financial ratings that charge less . In fact , I once had a client who worked for AAA but decided on a less expensive policy with better ratings and a lower cost .
AAA Term life insurance has the same guarantees of most Term life insurance . As of June , 2012 , their company 's AM Best rating is A - . To compare rates with AAA Term life insurance , go to a website offering instant life insurance quotes . Also , be sure to review the health requirements needed for AAA life insurance before applying . If you apply and are declined , it will go on your MIB and could make it more difficult to purchase some other life insurance policies .
AAA has auto insurance in many states and their rates are typically very competitive . Although they are mostly known for towing and labor benefits along with travel guides , they do have an insurance wing that is very reputable . A licensed broker can provide quotes from AAA and many other highly-rated carriers .
Every rating agency has their own ratings . With AM Best , A + + is their best rating . With Fitch , their highest rating is AAA . Moody 's highest rating is Aaa . S&P 's best life insurance company rating is AAA . Weiss 's highest rating is A + . The companies with the best ratings will have high ratings from all these agencies .
Rental car companies offer a physical damage option as an amendment to their standard contract . This option , offered for an additional daily charge , provides for covreage in the event that their car is damaged while in your posession and control . But before you sign on the dotted line for this , check with your insurance professional to see if your personal auto policy extends coverage on to rental cars . If it does , then save yourself the money on the rental agreement and do n't accept the option . Also , check with your bank card provider . Many include coverage on rental cars usually up to $ 500.00 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Participating Whole Life Insurance A Good Investment ?
Video Transcript : Hello everyone I 'm Steve Savant syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show : Steve Savant 's Money The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and my question today is : is participating whole life a good investment ? Well , many people feel like this is more of a saving technique rather than an investment . It uses interest rates . It 's a dividend participating company , especially if it 's PAR . They 're going to actually give you a dividend every year . Part of that is just a return of unused premium and also part of their earnings on their portfolio . If you use the base policy the guaranteed cash values are the guarantees you have . So if you 're into guarantees and you do n't like risk and you do n't mind long haul investing and long haul savings which this product is perfect for , this could be something you may want to look at because that money could come out in withdrawals to bases and policy loans to gain depending upon how it 's set up . That could come out tax free and be huge as a supplement or retirement alternative . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole life and Universal Life are two types of permanent life insurance . Whole life can be participating or non-participating . Participating can receive dividends , whole life typically has guaranteed premiums and cash values . The `` investment '' is done for you and the policy does not require much if any management other than paying the premium . Universal Life is more flexible than whole life , it is an `` unbundled '' permanent insurance policy . The premium is flexible between a minimum and maximum . You can choose between various cost of insurance options such as yearly renewable term or level . You have a variety of investment options to choose from . In short you get to , and need to make decisions to manage the policy . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Participating whole life can be a supplement with or an alternative to a retirement plan . Generally , it is classified as a savings plan , not an investment plan . The product suitability for participating whole life insurance as an income source for retirement is a long term saver with low to zero risk tolerance and no less than a fifteen year annual premium commitment . The participating whole life policy needs to be designed for accumulating the maximum cash values over time . That means the design must use the lowest policy base amount with a combination of a term rider and paid up additions rider . Although historical returns are no indication of future performance , participating whole life insurance designed in this configuration has done well against long term government treasuries by several whole life companies .
Whether whole life is a good investment or not depends on how you define a good investment . That being said , it can be a good investment when you look at it closely . Life insurance creates cash at death and whole life is designed to be in force when you die , not if you die within a specified term From an estate planning point of view , that is a good thing , If you need insurance coverage , then the tax advantaged growth of a participating whole life policy can be attractive from a wealth accumulation point of view.The funds can , among other things , be used to supplement retirement income . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
As Jim mentioned it really depends on what you want your insurance to do . If you need permanent insurance to solve a permanent need then whole life could be an option . Whole life can be either participating or non-participating . If you have a participating policy then you participate in the profits of the insurance company . If you have a non-participating policy then you do not share in any profits , but chances are that your initial premium would have been lower . Another type of permanent insurance is Universal Life , which typically allows for more flexibility in premium level and investment options . Each type has its strengths and weaknesses I recommend that you would with a local insurance broker to find the plan that is right for you at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Why invest in whole life insurance ? Well it is one of the few insurance products that you actually control , not the insurance carrier . That is a big reason why whole life insurance is expensive compared to other life products . The insurance company bears the risk of the contract as they can not alter or change the terms of the contract , they can not raise the price of the policy in later years and must receive the policy owners permission to do anything to the policy . What a whole life offers is a decent return for the safety it provides the policy holder . There is very little investment risk to a whole life policy compared to other places where a person can put money . This also is reflected in the return . If you had money invested in 2008 you learned first hand about investment risk . That said , while the rest of my investments were losing 40 % my whole life gained value . You ca n't go backwards with a whole life which makes it a good part of anybody 's planning . I call whole life the most boring investment a person can make . Why ? it does what it says it will do .
Whole Life insurance is not an investment , it is a way to provide an immediate estate and a systematic way to save money in a very tax favorable way . Whole life provides a sound foundation for a good investment portfolio . The amount of the Whole Life would depend on your personal goals and financial situation . While buy term and invest the difference is a great idea , the reality is that most people who buy term never follow through on investing the difference . Life happens , emergencies come up and the money that was to be invested gets used for other things . This is fact based on statistics . If you want to invest , invest . If you want insurance that will be there when you will need it most , buy Whole Life insurance . Never put all your eggs in one basket . A base of Whole Life with added term insurance for your life insurance needs and sound investments to top off the portfolio is a safe sound way to accumulate cash for retirement and providing for final expense and a legacy for your family
Participating whole life insurance is the most cryptic contract in the insurance and financial product inventory . It is difficult to disassemble into distinguishable parts . That being said , a base policy in participating whole life insurance is a guaranteed premium for a guaranteed death benefit for the maturity of the contract , generally between age 100 and 121 . The dominate portfolio of many participating whole life insurance company is investment grade government bonds . Those portfolio returns coupled with a return of unused premium form the basis of a dividend .
Is Northwestern Mutual whole Life a good investment ? Well it depends on your needs . Your needs are what make any choice a good or bad investment . First Northwestern Mutual is a very highly rated fiscally strong company , as many others are . Using Whole life as an investment does work as part of an overall investment strategy as it provides a safe place to accumulate money as well as protecting your other plans . What you will find is whole life insurance is the most boring investment product out there . It 's not exciting , it 's not racy , it 's not an up and down product . It is a slow safe and secure place to put money out there . It 's boring because it does what it says it will do . I have owned whole life for almost 30 years and it has never let me down . Ca n't say the same about my real estate or stock market investments during that same window of time . Oh , last thing to keep it short . Whole life cash values do n't go backwards . You ca n't lose it once it 's there .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
The operative word here is investment . Participating whole life can be a savers vehicle but not an investment . For long term conservative savers , who desire guarantees , participating whole life insurance can provide returns generally greater than ten year Treasuries . The cash value accounts accumulate tax deferred and may be able to generate tax free income via withdrawals to basis and policy loans of gain .
Cash values life insurance can be a savings or investment policy depending upon which crediting method is used and how the policy is designed . There are three saving life insurance policies : Participating whole life insurance , current assumption universal life insurance and indexed universal life insurance . There is one investment life insurance policy that uses a crediting method of separate sub accounts with equity and bond allocations : Variable universal life . The performance of a life insurance policy as a savings or investment policy may depend on the policy design . That design must use the lowest cost of insurance death benefit option that complies with the TAMRA regulations to contain the policy expense . If designed correctly , life insurance can be a great savings or investment policy that can generate tax free retirement income as long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . These policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate The question of who should buy whole life insurance depends on the need for the coverage . When you 're young and you have 40 years to grow the cash value/face amount , it can be a helpful vehicle for growing funds while providing great life insurance protection -LRB- especially participating WL policies -RRB- . If you are buying purely for the death benefit , I recommend you look at purchasing a Guaranteed Universal Life policy -LRB- these policies maximize the death benefit and minimize the premium as they do n't focus on the build-up of cash value -RRB- . If you only need the coverage for a set amount of time -LRB- e.g. 20 years -RRB- , then you may want to look into term life insurance . While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to find out which benefit structure will be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for assistance . Thanks very much .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is Mutual Fund Exempt From Tax ?
That is a great question ! The answer depends upon what the mutual fund is invested in . If the fund is involved in municipal bonds , -LRB- City , State or Government bonds issued to fund public projects -RRB- then you will not pay taxes on the profits that you may see . If your mutual fund is involved with stock funds , then you will pay one or more taxes . If you are paid a cash dividend , then your income taxes will be due on that payment . If the stocks increase in value , you will pay capital gains on the difference . I hope that helps . Thanks for asking !
In Canada , most mutual funds are set up as trusts . What that means to investors is that everything flows through to the investor . Interest , capital gains and dividends flow through and the mutual fund does not pay any of the taxes . The fund earns its `` own money '' on fees and would pay tax on that income . Note : Some mutual funds are set up as `` corporate class '' , they also `` flow through '' If you have further questions , or if you feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . Mutual funds are often used as part of a retirement plan . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
In Canada , variable annuities are referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but there are differences . Which one is better depends on your objectives . Both offer diversified investment opportunities to build wealth . In addition , segregated fund policies provide important wealth protection , business and estate planning solutions . The key differences : Guarantees on your principal - The money you invest in a seg fund is guaranteed up to 100 % upon death or maturity . Locking-in market gains - Some seg funds allow you to lock in market gains -LRB- `` resets '' -RRB- that can increase the amount payable at death or maturity . Bypass probate - Seg fund death benefit proceeds are paid directly to a named beneficiary instead of your estate . This bypasses probate , a public process that can be both costly and lengthy . Creditor protection - By designating a qualified beneficiary on your seg fund policy , your investments maybe exempt from seizure by creditors in the event of unforeseen bankruptcy or legal proceedings . Segregated funds are well suited to : Business owners looking for creditor protection succession planning or emergency fund solution . Pre-retirees looking for wealth accumulation but want to limit potential losses with maturity and death guarantees . Pre-retirees and retirees looking to preserve their legacy and transfer their estate in the most private , timely and cost-effective way . If you have further questions . or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is addition information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca
Mutual funds distributions are different from the dividends paid by stocks . Stock dividends are usually a distribution of profits . Most mutual funds are set up as trusts and pay tax at the highest rate on any gains -LRB- interest , dividends , capital gains -RRB- that are held in the mutual fund . In order to avoid paying tax at the highest rate the mutual find flows through the gains to unit holders . Some mutual funds also distribute a portion of the original capital . Consequently , the distribution paid by a mutual fund does not simple reflect the dividends paid by the stocks held by the mutual fund . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
That is a great question ! A 403b is a retirement plan that is set up for certain occupations , like school teachers , Ministers , and some tax exempt organizations . They can be funded by annuities , custodial mutual fund accounts , or a combination of both . The contributions can be made to an account pre-tax , and taxed upon withdrawal , or they can be in a Roth and taxes on contributions paid in result in tax free withdrawals . You will want to see which plan options are available to you , and speak with an adviser about what would work best for you . Thanks for asking !
A mutual fund is very liquid , you can usually cash out with a phone call . Now if you mean by liquidity what is the cost to do so , that is different . A front loaded mutual fund has no redemption costs normally as you have already paid the costs up front . Those costs are not returnable . A rear loaded mutual fund puts 100 % of you funds into the investment , but if you redeem early -LRB- as in 5-10 years depending on the fund -RRB- you will pay some sort of cost to redeem . The exception to this would be the money market mutual fund as many of that type of mutual fund actually offer the ability to write checks from the account . Basically if you are worried about how liquid a mutual fund is , you should probably not be there . As with most investments , the plan should be long term . There are other places to place short term money .
You need to understand what a Mutual Fund is to understand that you need to change your question . Mutual Funds are comprised of several individual funds which meet the overall funds growth objective , i.e. aggressive growth to a conservative approach . Inside this Mutual Fund , the individual funds my be removed or sold with another fund replacing it or not . So , can a mutual fund go out of business ? No . Can a Mutual Fund be closed to new funds , YES ! Contact your local Registered Representative to get more specific details .
Can a mutual fund go out of business ? Technically no , a mutual fund can not go bankrupt . A mutual fund is a combination of stocks and bonds purchased from other companies and the government depending on the goal of the mutual fund . Usually a mutual fund has a wide distribution of funds so in the event of one or more of the investment choices within the fund fail , the fund it 's self remains secure .
Universal Life Insurance , is first and foremost a life insurance policy . If you require life insurance to provide cash at death to protect your loved ones , your business or your estate then an opportunity is created for you to utilize the reserve or cash value and use universal life as an `` investment '' . In Canada , there are limits to the amounts you can fund a universal life policy to keep the `` tax advantaged '' status of being exempt from accrual taxation . For individuals and corporations in the top tax brackets this tax advantaged status alone might make Universal Life a `` good investment '' , but for most there needs to be an life insurance requirement . In Canada , all earnings inside a Universal Life policy are expressed as interest , however , they can mirror the earnings of many of the top mutual funds . One company offers 400 + investment options in a `` tax advantaged '' plan . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How much Variable Universal Life costs you depends on a number of factors , some are flexible , some are not . Universal life is a complex product that unbundles the components of a whole life policy to provide you with more control and flexibility . The basic building blocks are cost of insurance , expense charges and investment earnings . There are a number of death benefit options available which affect the cost of insurance . For example you can have a level death benefit or level insurance plus cash value . The cost of insurance can be annually increasing for life , annual increasing then paid up at 85 , level and a number of other options that vary by company . The expense portion of the premium is stated in the policy . Some expenses are fixed and guaranteed others are variable so you would need to refer to the policy for details . In Canada , the earnings inside a universal life policy are always expressed as interest . Some policies have 400 + investment options that , in addition to Guaranteed Interest , can mirror the performance -LRB- positive or negative -RRB- of a variety of mutual funds in a tax preferred environment . I say mirror , because you do not actually own units in the particular mutual fund , just the performance . In Canada , the total maximum premium to keep the policy exempt for accrual taxation is set by the government . This provides you with flexibility , it is important that you understand that if the the policy is underfunded it could go out of force . The policy needs to be managed . So how much does Variable Universal Life Cost ? It depends . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further question , or feel tat I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Mutual funds are sold by registered representatives . In order to set up a mutual fund one way would be to contact a registered representative who could help you . The first step would be to understand your situation and your investment objectives -LRB- know your client -RRB- . Then recommend a portfolio that fits your objectives . Mutual funds usually have a minimum investment amount that varies by fund company . For example $ 25 or $ 50 monthly or lump sums of $ 1,000 to $ 100,000 -LRB- or more -RRB- . In Canada , if you are self-employed -LRB- any age -RRB- or within 10-15 years of retirement then segregated funds are an option to consider . They are similar to mutual funds but since they are issued by insurance companies they have guarantees and features mutual funds can not match . More information on what you ought to know about protecting and growing your Nest Egg can be found at WEBSITELINK If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
In Canada , most mutual funds are set up as trusts . What that means to investors is that everything flows through to the investor . Interest , capital gains and dividends flow through and the mutual fund does not pay any of the taxes . The fund earns its `` own money '' on fees and would pay tax on that income . Note : Some mutual funds are set up as `` corporate class '' , they also `` flow through '' If you have further questions , or if you feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . Mutual funds are often used as part of a retirement plan . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Yes , No and Maybe . Now , are we all clear on that ? The simple version of things is that failure to comply with the individual mandate will trigger a penalty for an adult of $ 95 or 1 % of Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- . And , if the average citizen knows anything at all about ObamaCare then this is probably the piece they know about . As with so many aspects of ObamaCare , when one gets down into the details the picture gets less clear . First , there were certain groups excluded from ObamaCare and the individual mandate from the law 's very beginning -LRB- members of certain faiths such as the Amish , people enrolled in health care sharing ministries and Native Americans are prominent examples -RRB- . You are also exempted from the individual mandate penalty if the lowest cost marketplace option in your area is more than 8 % of your family income or you fall below the tax filing threshold . As the law has continued to `` evolve '' there has been a new class of exemptions granted by the IRS for `` hardship '' exemptions . This IRS form provides 14 different hardship exemptions a taxpayer can claim to avoid paying the individual mandate penalty . Some are rather narrowly constructed and have an obvious logic to them , the exemption for being homeless for example . Others , are worded in ways that can leave a lot of room for creativity . Some of my favorite hardship exemptions are ; 1 -RRB- You received a shut off notice from your utility company . -LRB- So , do n't pay your gas bill for a couple of months , get a shutoff notice then pay your bill , and you qualify for a health penalty waiver - can anybody foresee lots of people having `` cash flow '' problems on their utility bills in the years to come ? -RRB- 2 -RRB- You experienced the death of a close family member . -LRB- Yep , that 's it . Does n't really define the time line , what `` experienced '' truly means , what does `` close '' mean and how far out on the family tree can you go and still say someone was a family member . The potential for creativity in this area is hilarious to anticipate . -RRB- 4 -RRB- Your individual plan is cancelled and you believe other marketplace plans are unaffordable . -LRB- When it comes to belief , do any of us really believe that health insurance is affordable ? What is my belief predicated on ? Will my belief be viewed differently if I am a Tea Party donor or a supporter of the Occupy movement ? -RRB- 5 -RRB- You experienced another hardship in obtaining health insurance . -LRB- I agree that brevity is the soul of wit but this may take things to the extreme . What 's a hardship to one person is an inconvenience to another . Dust off your creative writing skills , I can foresee lots of tales of woe about losing your dog of 15 years -LRB- hey , the dog meant more to me than some close relatives -RRB- , that you only have dial-up internet , why the mind runs wild with the possibilities ! So , will you be penalized on your 2014 taxes in 2015 if you do n't have acceptable health insurance . Technically , yes . In practical terms , many people will be able to claim an exemption and that will significantly dilute the anticipated revenue stream -LRB- and the government has already included individual mandate tax penalties in its cost projections for ObamaCare -RRB- from and the practical effect of the individual mandate on people 's behavior . In many ways you will have to be almost actively seeking out the opportunity to pay the tax penalty or be in that place in life where you are getting by financially without a health insurance payment and not much of anything that could smack of a hardship occurs in your life . For a lot of other people , some life circumstances during many years of their lives will let them take a pass on the penalty . You can bet the tax preparation services are going to be going great guns on this , they 've already started trying to help people enroll . It 's only logical to extend that to making sure every hardship their client is entitled to is reported .
No , Life Insurance is not exempt from state or federal estate tax unless it is of an amount that is exempted by law . That amount varies by state for state estate taxes , and a few states do not have state estate tax -LRB- or inheritance tax -RRB- at all . The limit in 2013 for federal estate tax is $ 5,250,000 . If the estate is larger than that with life insurance proceeds included , federal estate tax will be owed on the amount that is not exempt . Life insurance that is properly set up in an irrevocable life insurance trust is not subject to estate tax .
Yes , the death benefit that your beneficiary would receive is considered part of the value of your estate . If you passed away leaving a surviving spouse , your spouse would not have to pay any federal estate tax , regardless of the size of your estate . If no spouse is surviving at the time of death , there is a 5.25 million dollar exemption , plus any exemptions remaining from when the first spouse died . Only the amount beyond that exemption is taxed . State estate taxes have their own exemptions and regulations , depending on the state .
In Canada , an EFT -LRB- Exchange Traded Fund -RRB- and a Mutual Fund are similar , but there are differences . This is an overview only . Mutual funds are actively traded by investment managers . They set a strategy and buy and sell stocks and more to achieve a return . An EFT reflects the performance of an index the S&P 500 or the S&P / TSX Composite for example . Note : There are some mutual funds and segregated funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that hold EFTs as investments . If you have further questions , or if you feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . Mutual funds are often used as part of a retirement plan . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
In Canada , mutual fund fees on non-registered accounts are not tax deductible . Fees paid to an advisor to manage an non-registered investment account are tax deductible , however . The advisor fees in a mutual fund are imbedded in the fund . Ask whether you advisor can arrange to change to a class of funds that charges you the advisor trailer fee directly . This way you can deduct it . If you have further questions , or if you feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . Mutual funds are often used as part of a retirement plan . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Life insurance is subject to estate tax when it brings the value of the estate -LRB- all assets , including the life insurance death benefit -RRB- over the exempted amount . Only the value of the estate that exceeds the exemption is subject to estate tax . The federal exemption for 2014 is $ 5,340,000 . However , some states collect state estate or inheritance tax with smaller exemptions . Life insurance proceeds are not included in the value of the estate when the life insurance policy is owned by a properly set up Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust . The ILIT must hold the trust at least three years before death of the insured .
which is better life insurance or a mutual fund ? I guess I would ask for what ? What do you want it to do ? Since a mutual fund actually can be literally thousands of possibilities , which type of mutual fund are you thinking about ? A high risk / high reward type pacific rim fund ? A new markets fund ? A government bond fund ? Are you comparing similar risk models when you compare or do you assume that it 's an equal comparison with unequal products ?
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Is Life Insurance Important For Children ?
Life insurance for the sake of the children is only as important as your dreams or the cultural expectations may dictate in your social strata of society . Education , weddings , down payment on a first home and an emergency fund are only a few of the items that generally are integrated into child planning for the future . If the question is regarding life insurance on a child , then final expense for funeral and medical expenses in the case of a childhood tragedy . In could be justified that educational outlays , or other large financial commitments born by the parents , would be reimbursed by the proceeds from a childs death claim .
There is three reasons to insure a child with permanent life insurance . First , the reason no one likes to think about , but a child 's death is devastating on all levels , but is a possibility . Not having the money to bury a child just adds extra hardship during an extremely difficult time . Second reason is to protect the child 's insurability . Once the child has a life insurance policy , they can in most cases increase face amounts without proof of underwriting . This is crucial to a child diagnosed with type I diabetes , cancer or even worse . The third and final reason to insure a child with life insurance is the cash value . Not only can you use the policy as a teaching moment for the child to learn to save but the many uses as the child grows into an adult . Cash value from a life insurance policy can be used for emergencies , hardships , as well as college , a down payment on a first house or even retirement . Child life insurance is so affordable and important , every parent should strongly consider it for their children .
Why is life insurance important for a child ? It creates the cornerstone of a financial plan for their lifetime while they 're still wetting their pants . What a parent can do for a child is create a policy that grows over time and can give a child future options for additional insurance that can not be denied by the insurance company . One of the most powerful gifts you can do for your children is take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' down the road to your child when they wish to increase coverage .
The only way to answer this is to look at your situation and determine why you should consider having Life Insurance . Here are some examples why you would consider having a Life Insurance . you are married . A life policy would pay off any expenses and help to maintain the standard of living you currently have or perhaps want to provide the means to improve the living standard . you have children . This is a common reason . Have coverage to support your spouse until the kids move out . Perhaps you want to make sure the children have the means to go to college if you were to die prematurely . your a partner owning a business . Life Insurance is used for Key Person & Buy-Sell agreements . Key Person pays the company for lost income if a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee passes while the company looks for someone to replace you . Buy-Sell purchases the ownership of your partners half that would otherwise fall to the family , surviving spouse . you have a bank loan . Sometimes , depending on the structure of a loan , you might be required to have Life Insurance which would pay the loan back upon your untimely death . This is one way a bank may minimize the risk on the loan defaulting . There are just 4 examples which are common . There are many other situations where it is good to have Life Insurance . Contact your agent/broker to discuss your situation .
Life Insurance is important , especailly if you are married and plan to have children because it allows you to save money while planning long range . Life insurance is an important piece of the total financial plan that enables tax management strategies , and if you are young by using stock based life insurance enables investment strategies that can build assets while you are in essence doing `` dollar cost averaging '' which minimizes your risk by buying stocks at a regular interval based on the current price of the stock . Before this administration began the `` stock market on steroids '' the share price of stocks fluctuated and the ability to buy at a regular interval meant your overall price per share was decreased while over time the net value per share increased . Life Insurance can enable you to know that you will have the funds to educate the children while at the same time if an emergency happened you had the financial stablity to piece your life back together and continue living a life full of dreams and promises . Life insurance becomes an important piece of the financial plan that enables Estate Planning thereby enabling the parent to pass assets to the children while minimizing tax consequences . For the business owner there are many business planning strategies using life insurance to reach your financial goals .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
I am actually working on these policies right now for a few clients . They are choosing an amount they want to spend per year , and committing that to a policy for their children . The basic objective is to accumulate an attractive amount of money that could then be distributed as supplemental retirement income later on in the kids lives . Since this money will grow over literally decades , enough can be grown so that the yearly income can be substantial . We are kind of backing into the face amount once we decide on the yearly contribution and on how much money we would like to let the children take out of the policy when the time is right . So , like anything else , you get what you pay for it . You can go high or low on the funding , and high or low on the face amount . It all depends on what role you want life insurance to play in wealth accumulation for your children . Why not go for it ?!
Juvenile life insurance is especially important for those that have trouble saving money . Funeral costs average $ 8,000 to $ 12,000 depending on your location . God forbid a child to pass away , but you do want enough to cover their final expenses . Term life on a minor is very inexpensive , whereas a juvenile whole life will cost a few dollars more . One thing I do with my clients buying life insurance on themselves is to add a child life rider which can give all the children a set face amount -LRB- usually $ 10,000 each -RRB- for one low rate usually under $ 5.00 per month with no limit of children covered . This is one of the most affordable options for families of 3 or more children .
If the household relies on both of you as wage earners , then both of you need life insurance . One major factor to consider is annual salary . You should get at least 3 - 5 times this number . Other things to consider is amount of debt -LRB- mortgage , credit , loans etc. -RRB- , children 's college tuition and any attained assets currently owned . All these things among others should be considered when figuring out how much life insurance should be purchased for the wage earner . This is why it is very important to speak to an Agent about purchasing Life Insurance .
The price of life insurance for children is very low , possibly as low as it will cost for that person for the rest of his or her life . So one reason people buy life insurance for their children , is to lock in a low rate for them for the rest of their lives . Another reason is to make sure that they get reasonably priced coverage while they still qualify for it . This can be especially important for families where type 1 diabetes , heart disease , or other genetic conditions may run in the family . Finally , some people buy life insurance for their children because , if the unthinkable would happen , they would not be able to give their child a fitting funeral without it .
I assume that you mean failed as in `` did not pay what it guaranteed '' . Annuities are backed by the claims paying ability of the Insurance company that issued the policy . This is why it is very important to consider the financial rating of the company you use . Since 2008 , there have only been 3 `` B '' rated insurance companies that have failed . There have been more C , D , & E rated companies that have failed , but not many . And most of the ones that did were D rated or worse . Since 2008 there have been no B + or better companies that have failed . -LRB- Actually its longer than that , but the records I currently have access to only go back that far . But I am not personally aware of any insurance companies that were A rated at time of failure -RRB- This is why most agents recommend using a B + , or better yet , an A rated company . It is also important to point out that just because an insurance company fails , does not mean the annuity fails to pay . Insurance companies are highly regulated . And the states all have a safety net type system set up to help secure the guarantees made by failing insurance companies . Visit WEBSITELINK for more info on what happens in the event of an insolvency . But it is important to remember that whatever safety net might exist . It is no substitute for a solid financial rating . There are way too many well rated companies to use a poorly rated one .
Children purchase life insurance on their parents to provide funds for final expenses . These policies can not be purchased without the parents consent . If the parents have a single heir that heir should not have any difficulty buying the policy . When there are multiple heirs it would be very important to make sure every other potential heir is aware of what is being done and why .
Why is life insurance important for a child ? It creates the cornerstone of a financial plan for their lifetime while they 're still wetting their pants . What a parent can do for a child is create a policy that grows over time and can give a child future options for additional insurance that can not be denied by the insurance company . One of the most powerful gifts you can do for your children is take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' down the road to your child when they wish to increase coverage .
Does your child need life insurance ? Well there will be an answer for everybody and they may not be the same . I purchased life insurance on my children . Here are a few reasons why ... . if one of my children were to die , I do n't think I would be able to go straight back to work on Monday as if nothing happened . I would n't want to have the price of the headstone and service costs get into the pain my wife and I would be experiencing . Imagine telling your wife `` that costs too much '' for the headstone she wants for your child . I also bought for positive reasons too . I purchased whole life so they have permanent insurance working hard at a low cost for them . They have solid cash values and life insurance to take into adulthood .
Retirement should be about reducing stress . In order to do this we need to evaluate those things that could happen and develop strategies for dealing with them . At a minimum this will mean maintaining proper insurance coverage on your auto and home . It well might mean purchasing life insurance for the specific purpose of creating a legacy for those you love . If you do that you can spend your assets without any thought of conserving them for your heirs . The most pressing risk according to surveys is the risk of living too long . None of us wants to run out of money . The possibility of living a long time in retirement is quite high . Imbedded in this risk is the likelihood of a needing medical care and custodial care . Another risk is the result of the economy . It could go through major shifts and investments might have a period of decline that could jeopardize your retirement . At that point it is unlikely that you would be able to do anything about it as our ability to work diminishes with every passing year . Another risk that we face is that we could lose our spouse . This is inevitable but it could come sooner rather than later and that could have a profound impact on available money and support . Widows are often faced with very tough economic realities . Long term care requirements are the number one reason why a wealthier person would run out of assets in retirement . There are several strategies to address this risk including long term care insurance . There are several things a person can do to increase their income in retirement . One of the most significant things is to carefully select the date when social security and pension benefits start . The social security benefits increase the longer a worker waits up to the age of 70 . This increases the benefit to a widow as well , should the worker die first . People often own a home . The value of a home minus the mortgage is known as home equity . This home equity can be used to derive income . A reverse mortgage can be put in place that will allow a person to remain in their home and yet withdraw loans against the home for income in retirement . The need for tax planning certainly doesnt end at retirement . There are tax-saving decisions available that will expand income . Your assets are not all taxed in the same way and by converting assets to income in a tax wise manner can save a great deal and expand spendable income in retirement . In all strategies there are trade-offs . If you take a reverse mortgage on the home the amount you can leave your children declines . There will be years in which medical expenses will greatly reduce your taxable income . A Roth IRA provides income that isnt subject to tax which could be a benefit to keep your income in a lower income tax rate bracket . One of the things that I think is most important in developing strategies for retirement is to establish decision points . These are dates or times when you and your spouse or perhaps including your children decide on where you will live , who will provide care if necessary , what assets can be gifted and other important decisions . I am getting ready for one of those conferences even as I write this . It is important to make decisions before there is a crisis . A widow told me a few days ago that moving out of her home into a down-sized facility was one of the most difficult tasks she had ever performed . The emotional and physical toll was enormous . She had planned to make the move several years in the future and she is convinced that she would hot have been able to make the decision , let along , and make the move at that later date . Decide now when you will downsize . Decide now who will assist you or when you will begin to get outside help . There are so many decisions and it is always best to make them before it is absolutely necessary . These decisions can have a profound effect on insuring the financial success of your retirement .
The reason you are required to have insurance is because in the event of you causing injury or damage to someone else . Your insurance pays for that . Now there is such a thing as self insured which means you can afford to pay for all damages yourself . but the thought can be quite frightful , Example you plow into a school bus full of children because your tire blew and you killed a bunch of children would you be willing to risk everything you own to pay for the damages ? That is why you have insurance is to cover damages to others . On the flip side that also covers you if you have un insured and under insured coverage 's so that if someone hit you and has no insurance then your medical bills are covered also
Trampolines are an attractive nuisance not unlike the pond on the back forty , They are the source of a lot of additional liability exposure to the policy and the homeowner . The biggest reason that liability increases is because more than one child or person is one the equipment at a time . Most families with a trampoline have n't established risk-based rules for use and enjoyment and so what looks to be a fun and exciting play thing , becomes a hazard teeming with potential to cause great bodily harm . Insurance companies know from experience that trampolines cause losses and are expensive to insure because the injuries can become catastrophic . Broken bones are one thing . A broken neck with paralysis is completely another but well within the outcomes on a trampoline . Add to the trampoline an almost complete lack of training or instruction on the correct methods of use -LRB- and the lack of appropriate rules for use -RRB- , and we find the trampoline becomes similar to a loaded gun just waiting for curious hands with just as much potential to destroy a healthful life . Another issue that crops us is the degradation of the platform fabric since it is exposed to weather and sunlight . People have been known to bust through the platform because it became degraded due to the sun and weather effects . Bones get broke hitting the found and frame members below the deck . In my experience , most companies do n't want anything to do with insuring a home with a trampoline . A relative few do n't charge additional premium and do n't restrict the presence of a trampoline . Others still will permit a trampoline when it is is present for coverage at an additional charge . One carrier we represent charges an additional $ 75 annually for the trampoline , requires the fences to be installed -LRB- most trampolines come with them -RRB- , and they wo n't provide insurance on the home unless the trampoline is also included in coverage . All in all , you do n't simply have the choice to not insure the trampoline since the mere act of having one dramatically increases the chances of having a loss ! That said , trampolines can be enjoyed safely but it requires careful and near constant monitoring by the responsible adults , the establishment of rules for use , the ability to protect the equipment from non-invited use by neighbors when the owner or their children are not using the equipment , and inspection periodically for signs of degradation and normal wear and tear . Additionally , basic skills should be discussed , taught and understood , limits should be placed on the behavior that is allowed on the trampoline , and responsible adults should be willing to stop all play when careful control can not be maintained . Many injuries occur when the parents are not paying attention or aware from the home . Let 's face it , no one wants to be sued for the liability that may arise out of an injury on a trampoline and no one wants to deal with the often catastrophic injuries that can occur to your children or the neighbors . These latter comments and insight are a good foundation for understanding why an insurance company does n't like trampolines and why homeowner insurance is often negatively influenced when they are present on the property .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
Here are just a few reasons why you need life insurance : You own a home with your partner and have a mortgage . What will happen if you die prematurely and your partner can not afford to make the mortgage payments ? You have student loans , credit card debt or any type of debt . You have children who depend on your future income for daily living expenses and education . Funeral and burial expenses Your family would lose a loved one and have to deal with the pain of the loss . Why leave additional stress and the financial burden on family members to pay off outstanding debts .
end question
start question
annuities
How Long Do Annuities Last ?
All annuities should be purchased as ultimate income products . Distributions can take the form of withdrawals , period certain like 10 or 20 year payouts and even lifetime income you ca n't outlive . If you annuitized your deferred annuity with the life only option , it will generate income for the rest of your life .
That is a great question ! The definition of an annuity is '' any stream of payments that has a fixed total . '' When we use the word in our financial word , we are referring to an investment vehicle designed for providing a long lasting income stream . They are offered by insurance companies and other financial institutions , and are used to fund retirements , grants and trusts . Here 's a very simple description of how an annuity works : They are funded by a deposit , which then sits for a number of years gathering interest . After that period of time , the annuity begins paying out a set amount until either it runs out , the owner dies , or the owners spouse dies , depending upon how the annuity is structured . It guarantees that there will be an income that lasts as long as you do . Because they require that the deposit sit untouched for many years , an annuity may not be a good investment for some people . That deposit money can be taken out , but there are very costly penalties . As a result , regulations require that the seller sit down with you first and do what is called a `` suitability study . '' They will go over your financial situation , your retirement plans , and your goals . If it is found to not be `` suitable '' for you , they can not sell you one . This protects folks that may have need for that cash from being trapped into a losing investment . I hope that answers your question for you , if you 'd like more detail , I 'd be happy to help , feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Annuities are always taxable when gain is withdrawn from the annuity unless the annuity is placed inside a Roth account . Annuities do defer taxes when no money is removed from the annuity , so if no withdrawal , the gain is not realized until it is withdrawn from the annuity . Annuities use the Last in Last out -LRB- LIFO -RRB- accounting rule , which means gain in the annuity must be withdrawn before basis is removed , unless the annuity is annuitized . For annuities with a cost basis -LRB- i.e. non tax deducted/qualified -RRB- annuitization uses a tax rule known as the exclusion ratio to make part of the income stream gain and part non-taxable basis .
That is a great question ! Deferred Annuities have two stages to them - an accumulation phase , where the contract accumulates growth , and an annuitization stage , where it begins to pay out , or `` annuitize '' . Your contract should specify how long your accumulation phase lasts , and for how long your payments will last . Eachannuity can vary in what your options are to start your payment streams , so contact your agent and have them review what your contract allows . Generally if you do nothing , they begin to pay out automatically when you hit a specified age . Contact your agent , to be certain that you can begin your payments without any issues , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
The two primary differences between long and short term disability are the policy elimination periods , and the policy benefit duration . The elimination periods describes how quickly benefit payments begin after the policyholder becomes disabled . Short term policies have much shorter elimination periods . The benefit duration describes how long payments will continue while the policyholder is continuously disabled . Short term policies may have a benefit duration lasting up to 24 months , while long term policies may have a benefit duration lasting to age 65 .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
You life insurance proceeds will last according to the type of policy you got . If a Term policy , the policy will specify a certain number of years , such as 10 or 20 . When the end of the term comes up , the policy will end or jump up in price to an incredibly high price . If death occurs during the term , the policy proceeds will be paid . If death does not occur during the term , no proceeds are paid . If Whole Life that you have not borrowed against and have made payments according to schedule , the policy will pay out when you die or when it matures -LRB- usually at age 100 -RRB- , whatever comes first . If Universal Life , the proceeds will last for as long as the policy was set up to last , and according to how it is performing . UL usually has a guaranteed no lapse period of a set number of years , as long as premiums are made . If the interest rate goes up , it can last longer .
You know , there really is a right way to answer this question . I think the right way is to do whats best for you as the beneficiary . Life insurance is , after all , a care package from the insured to his loved one . It is a way of saying , I love you , and I take care of you now . Im going to make sure that an insurance company takes care of you later . This means that the golden rule is this : the quality of life you have now , is the quality of life you should have if you suffer the tragic loss of your spouse . If you are not making do with less now , you should not have to make do with less later . The money you need to pay your monthly bills now , is the amount of money you should have to pay your monthly bills later . The larger question is : for how long do you need this benefit to last ? For how long do you want to live off the insurance money ? There are a number of factors involved in that decision . First , and most important , is buying yourself the time needed to grieve and move on . Think about it . You have dedicated yourself to a life with someone . Now he is not there . And will not return . How long will it tell you to get back on your own two feet and renew your life ? Two years ? Five years ? Longer ? Then , what about your kids ? Theyve already lost one of their parents . Forever . They will need you more than ever . They will need you to spend as much time with them as possible . Can you afford to do this ? Life insurance can make sure the answer is yes .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
What annuities pay out depends on what you paid into them , how much they earned while in the accumulation phase , how long you want the payments to last . It also depends on whether you have a fixed annuity that has a guaranteed interest rate , or if you purchased a variable annuity for which the gain depends on the market gains or losses .
There are a variety of factors that impact how long 401 -LRB- k -RRB- savings will last , including : account balance , retirement age , living expenses , withdrawal rate , tax rates , charges and fees . Several investigative reports by the Employee Benefit Research Institute , 60 Minutes , Frontline , Forbes and other organizations show that most accounts run out of funds within 7-8 years , due to fees and taxes . And , if tax rates increase in the future as expected , the savings may be depleted much faster . To watch the video reports or for a detailed analysis to predict how long your savings will last go to WEBSITELINK iflretirement.com/usa-insurance-brokers
Guaranteed premium life insurance is a life insurance policy in which you get a contractual guarantee that the premium will not change . It will not increase , and it will not decrease . That is a very good deal . You do not want to have to worry about your premium changing . This product is , after all , supposed to be the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it should be dependable . Virtually all life insurance products available now provide premium guarantees . Its really just a question of how long the guarantee will last . Term insurance gives you guarantees for a specified amount of time . Could be 10 years , 15 , 20 , 30 , etc. . After that , watch out . The price could go skyhigh . Universal life could also give you guarantees for a specified amount of time . The interesting thing about this product is that since it has a flexible premium , you can determine how long you want that guarantee . It could last from a few years , to your lifetime . You can kind of make it function as permanent term insurance . No guaranteed cash accumulation , but a lifetime guarantee on the premium . And on the death benefit , by the way . Whole life typically comes with a lifetime guarantee on the premium . Thats the way the product is designed . I think you can appreciate that the longer you want the guarantee , the higher will be the premium . You get what you pay for . There you go . What else do you need to know ?
There are a lot of factors that affect the price of life insurance . How old are you ? Do you smoke or use tobacco ? What is your gender ? Have you had any serious health conditions ? How much life insurance coverage do you need ? How long do you want the coverage to last ?
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
Who has the best immediate annuity ? Well , last year , last month , last week , yesterday , today , tomorrow ? Rates change , companies move from best to 5th or 6th place in a week . You have to simply take other factors in beyond todays rates for your choice . Financial strength is important to look at as you want your annuity company to live longer than you do . What might be better is to pick from 3-5 companies whom you trust their financials and terms and as you get close to your move , make your decision .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Is A Roth IRA Better Than A 401K ?
How is a Roth better than a 401k ? Well it 's not a matter of better , it 's a matter of different . Both a Roth and 401k give you tax deferred savings , they just differ on when taxes are applied . A 401k allows contributions to go in pre-tax and grow tax deferred . When those funds are withdrawn they are income and subject to taxes in what ever bracket you 're in . A Roth does the opposite , you pay taxes on your contribution and it grows tax deferred , then distributions from your Roth are done without any tax implication . So the question of one over the other is do you think taxes will be higher or lower when you begin to withdraw funds ?
An employer sponsored 401 -LRB- k -RRB- might have employer contributions which would certainly make it a wonderful enhancement to your retirement . Your contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are usually before tax , so that reduces your current income tax . A Roth IRA , on the other hand is paid with contributions that are not currently tax deductible . Both plans accumulate money on a tax deferred basis . There isnt any tax on current earnings . However , when you start to draw benefits , assuming you meet all the requirements , the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- benefits will be taxed as ordinary income . The Roth IRA benefits will not be taxed at all .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
That is a great question . Rolling over a traditional tax qualified 401K account to a Roth IRA would generate taxes and penalties so the benefit would certainly not be the tax savings , now would it ? A 401K converion transfer is called a Roth Conversion . There is a conversion option that might work and we call it a `` backdoor Roth IRA '' and it might provide some advantages but will require several steps and tax computations and may not be appropriate for you based on the information provided . Your best answer would be to consult with a local agency to learn more about how this conversion tactics might benefit you in a Roth IRA .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
A Roth 401k is a designated Roth account . A designated Roth account is a feature in new or existing 401k , 403b or 457b plans that permit such plans to accept designated Roth contributions . The combined amount you can contribute to all designated Roth accounts in any one year for an individual under 50 years of age is $ 17,500 for 2014 . If you are age 50 or older by the end of 2014 , you can add an additional $ 5,500 in catch-up contributions . You can also contribute to both a Roth 401k and a Roth IRA in the same year which can increase the total contribution amount by $ 6,500 if you are 50 or older .
How is a Roth better than a 401k ? Well it 's not a matter of better , it 's a matter of different . Both a Roth and 401k give you tax deferred savings , they just differ on when taxes are applied . A 401k allows contributions to go in pre-tax and grow tax deferred . When those funds are withdrawn they are income and subject to taxes in what ever bracket you 're in . A Roth does the opposite , you pay taxes on your contribution and it grows tax deferred , then distributions from your Roth are done without any tax implication . So the question of one over the other is do you think taxes will be higher or lower when you begin to withdraw funds ?
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
A Roth IRA isnt better . A Roth IRA is different . Contributions for a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- reduce your current income tax . Contributions to a Roth IRA do not . Distributions from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are fully taxable as ordinary income . Distributions from a Roth IRA are not taxable at all . The limits to how much you can put into a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are quite generous . The limits to contributions to a Roth IRA are restrictive . There are taxes and possible penalties if you withdraw money from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- prior to age 59.5 . You can withdraw from the capital invested from a Roth IRA without tax consequences . There are advantages to both .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Beneficiary Of Life Insurance Supercede A Will ?
Yes , the beneficiary of a life insurance policy supercedes a will . The will pertains to the estate , and a life insurance beneficiary receives the proceeds of the policy outside the estate . The person named within the life insurance policy is the one who receives the benefit of that policy .
A life insurance policy is a legal contract . In California the life insurance company is legally bound to deliver the proceeds to the beneficiary in the event of death . The proceeds of the life insurance policy are not an asset of the estate . Therefore , the proceeds are not subject to probate , nor does the will have any impact on the process , unless the beneficiary and the contingent beneficiary have pre-deceased the insured .
Yes , the named beneficiary in a life insurance policy does . It is important to coordinate each document of course , but a life insurance policy is separate and distinct . The owner of the policy can change beneficiary designations by amendment of the contract directly with the insurance company at any time , but once designated , it can not be changed by other action .
Does a will supercede a life insurance beneficiary ? No as they are two `` separate '' legal documents that both carry out as instructed by the insured upon death . Unless the insurance policy 's beneficiary designation refers to the will or estate , the insurance policy will act independently of the will and probate .
In almost no cases does a will supercede the contractual designation of the beneficiary of a life insurance policy . However , you often hear about people updating their wills , while it is not so common to think about updating their life insurance policies . Do n't accidentally leave your policy to an ex-husband rather than a current one , to your parents rather than your own children , etc , by forgetting to change the beneficiaries on your life insurance policy . Your will can not undo the mess that would be created by leaving a big part of your estate to the wrong person .
Yes , the beneficiary of a life insurance policy supercedes a will . The will pertains to the estate , and a life insurance beneficiary receives the proceeds of the policy outside the estate . The person named within the life insurance policy is the one who receives the benefit of that policy .
Of course ! You have the option to put on primary beneficiaries , contingent beneficiaries -LRB- in case the primary predeceases the insured -RRB- , and even tertiary beneficiaries if you 'd like -LRB- in case the primary and contingent beneficiaries predecease the insured -RRB- . Each level -LRB- primary , contingent , and tertiary -RRB- can have more than one beneficiary . You also want to make sure to designate what happens to a beneficiary 's share if he/she predeceases the insured -LRB- especially if there is more than 1 beneficiary - e.g. does it go to the other beneficiary ? to the estate ? to someone else ? etc. -RRB- The other thing you want to make sure of is that the policy structure does not violate the `` Goodman Triangle '' -LRB- named after a court case -RRB- . The Goodman Triangle , in short , states that 2 of the 3 parties of a life insurance contract must be the same to avoid certain tax consequences -LRB- same owner and beneficiary with a different insured or same owner and insured with a different beneficiary -RRB- . If you want to place more than one beneficiary on the policy , the owner and insured would have to be the same person to not violate the Goodman Triangle . When the Goodman Triangle is violated , the situation can result in the monies being subject to estate taxes or gift tax consequences . If a policy is owned by a trust such as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , the insured and beneficiary will be the trust and the insured will be the person who 's life the trust was created for . The trust would illustrate all of the payout structure scenarios when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
The beneficiaries of a life insurance policy pay in a certain order . First is the primary beneficiary which can be a person , a few people paid by percentage , or an institution , such as to repay a loan . Second is the contingent beneficiary . The contingent beneficiary is paid if the primary benefit dies before or with the insured . Third is the tertiary beneficiary . This beneficiary receives life insurance proceeds if all of the primary and contingent beneficiaries die before or with the insured . If the later beneficiaries are not named on the policy , then life insurance proceeds roll into the estate and will be subject to probate and estate taxes . This is always as shame as life insurance proceeds are usually not taxed if there is a named beneficiary . Be sure and work with a knowledgeable agent or advisor to be sure your life insurance policy is set up correctly .
There is no income tax paid on life insurance benefits , in most cases . Life insurance does not go through probate if the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is a person . If the estate is large enough , estate taxes must be paid on life insurance . So in that respect , the IRS can take life insurance money , through applicable taxes . If you are asking if the IRS can take the proceeds of a life insurance policy if the insured person passes while owing back pay to the IRS , if the beneficiary is a person , the IRS can not take the life insurance money from the beneficiary . An exception would be if the beneficiary filed jointly with the insured , or if the beneficiary owed his/her own money to the IRS .
In Canada if you have a named beneficiary and not your estate then the proceeds bypass probate and are paid directly to the beneficiary . If you name a beneficiary in the `` protected class '' , spouse , parent , child , grandchild , then the policy is potentially protected from the owner 's creditors during the lifetime of the person whose life is insured . In all provinces except Quebec , the relationship must be between the life insured and the beneficiary . In Quebec , it is between the owner and the beneficiary . If you designate a beneficiary as irrevocable , then the policy also has potential creditor protection . In addition no changes to the policy can be made without the irrevocable beneficiary 's consent . If a corporation is owner and paying the premiums on a policy , the the company should be the beneficiary otherwise it will be considered to be a taxable benefit . Ultimately , who should be named the beneficiary depends on what you want to accomplish . If you have any further question or feel I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community ,
If the Annuity is owned by an individual and has an individual listed as the Beneficiary ; then it avoids probate and passes directly to the listed Beneficiary free of probate . But it is important to keep the Beneficiary for your Annuity updated on the contract . A Will does not override the Beneficiary designation on an Annuity contract . So make sure to review your Beneficiary designation upon any major life changes . Also , if the Beneficiary is not able to be found within a reasonable amount of time -LRB- or if they are deceased -RRB- , it can be reverted back to your Estate , thus being subject to Probate . This is why it is important to list a Contingent Beneficiary on your contract . You should also inform the Beneficiary that you listed them and give them contact info for the company .
Creditors can not go after the life insurance payout to pay the debts of the deceased insured person , as long as the beneficiary or beneficiaries who are receiving the life insurance proceeds are actual people . Life insurance bypasses probate , so the creditor does not have the opportunity to access the life insurance payout . If the beneficiary is the insured person 's estate , the creditors may be able to go after the life insurance death benefit to pay the debts of the insured . If the beneficiary is the one who has the debts , then the creditors can go after the life insurance payout . This is also true if the beneficiary shared a debt with the deceased .
Generally `` contingent '' in Life Insurance would refer to the beneficiary . You always name a beneficiary , who would receive the proceeds of the policy . In addition , you can also -LRB- optionally -RRB- name acontingent beneficiary . A contingent beneficiary is a secondary beneficiary that would receive the proceeds from the policy if the main or primary beneficiary does not survive the insured .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
Does Life Insrance work after you die ? Many would say that 's the only time it does work . Life insurance is all about death benefit . You pay the premiums while you are living . You name a beneficiary . Also a backup beneficiary in case your main beneficiary dies before you do . Upon your death ... your beneficiary gets paid . It 's a beautiful thing .
The Primary Beneficiary of a life insurance policy is the person first designated by the Owner of the policy to receive the death benefit if the Insured person passes . The Primary Beneficiary may be one or more persons , or it may be a trust or other entity . If the Primary Beneficiary is one person , he/she gets 100 % of the death benefit . If more than one beneficiary is noted , the death benefit may be split equally , or the policy may assign different percentages to go to each beneficiary . Most policies list a Contingent Beneficiary -LRB- or more than one , as described above -RRB- as well . If all the Primary Beneficiaries are deceased , the death benefit would go to the Contingent Beneficiaries in the manner noted by the policy . It is important to review life insurance policies regularly to make sure that the beneficiaries noted are up to date and that the death benefit goes to the person or persons intended .
When the primary beneficiary of life insurance dies , the death benefit is split up among the other primary beneficiaries , if there are any others on the policy . If there are no other primary beneficiaries , the money goes to the contingent beneficiaries . If there are no living contingent beneficiaries , the money goes to the estate upon the death of the insured . To avoid the money going to the estate , the owner of the policy can select a new primary beneficiary , or just be sure that there are other beneficiaries that are still alive , to receive the life insurance proceeds someday . It only takes a simple form to designate a new beneficiary .
Life insurance does not go into probate if the beneficiary is a person , trust or entity other than the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , if all beneficiaries are deceased , or if there is no beneficiary named on the policy , the insurance proceeds will be paid to probate court , where fees will be deducted . Life insurance with a designated beneficiary avoids all that .
If it is the Insured person and Policy Owner who has the claims against them , and they die and leave the life insurance proceeds to a beneficiary , the beneficiary does not have to pay the claims of the Insured unless they co-signed for that debt . If there is no beneficiary and the life insurance money ends up in the estate , creditor claims can be filed during probate . If it is the beneficiary who has the claims against them , it depends on the state of residence as to whether a claim can be filed against the beneficiary 's life insurance proceeds , and/or how much of the death benefit is subject to creditor claims .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Which Medicare Supplement Plan Is Best For Me ?
There are several factors to consider before making a decision for your senior Medicare needs : Foremost , will you be better off purchasing an insurance supplement , or is a Medicare Advantage plan better for you ? Those two solutions to solving your needs are different animals entirely , so make sure you educate yourself on the different advantages of each and look for only plans in your area . Some plans are county specific . Some supplements are area specific . This is one journey you do not want to take alone . So to help you make an informed decision with your agent , you of your power or attorney need to keep in mind the following items 1 . Are you eligible to change what you have ? 2 . What medications you take . 3 . How often do you go to the doctor ? 4 . How much risk are you willing to accept in return for lower premiums ? All insurance plans transfer some risk from the client to the insurance company . The less risk -LRB- deductibles and copay -RRB- on the client , the more premiums will be . Supplements that have the same letter name -LRB- PLan N , for example -RRB- theoretically cover the same items , so you should be shown what they do and do not cover , and be able to compare costs with other companies . 5 . Are you on assistance ? 6 . Are you under or over 65 ? When did you get part B ? 7 . What state and county do you live in ? 8 . Do you have extensive chronic illnesses ? 9 . Did you recently move , get married , get divorced , move in with family members ? 10 . What is the carriers financial rating and how long have they been in the Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage business ? These and other questions are ones I ask before making any recommendations to my clients . If you go to an independent broker who has many Medicare clients , he should have several choices to offer , as there are many companies that compete in this arena . It is n't an easy answer , hopefully the above questions will help you gather a checklist for your agent . If he or she does not ask many of these questions , or only has one solution , you might be better off to move on to a different agent
Medicare supplement plans depend on your specific needs so there is much more information that would be needed in order to determine which medicare supplemental plan is best suited for you . You should seek out the advice of a licensed insurance agent who can better guide you on which plan is best for you .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is There A Way To Assign A Portion Of My Life Insurance Policy For Cash ?
Good Day to you . There is no way to assign a portion of your benefit based on what you have provided however you might qualify for a life settlement . Life Settlements is basically selling your policy to get some cash . What happens if you qualify , is the owner and beneficiary would change . Upon death , the benefit would go to the new beneficiary/owner . I hope this helps . If you want more information , please reach out to me . Matt
Life insurance proceeds can not be paid to cash . A designated beneficiary must be assigned to receive the proceeds . In the instances where a beneficiary predeceases the insured and there are no contingent beneficiaries assigned/remaining , then the proceeds would be paid to the insured 's estate -LRB- assuming a trust is not involved - which i imagine is the case if your policy is provided via a federal employee program -RRB- - the proceeds must then go through the probate process and distribution would be handled by the courts . A beneficiary of a life insurance policy must have an insurable interest to the insured person - this includes persons , businesses , and other types of organizations . What is the reason for wanting to assign $ 50,000 of the $ 286,000 coverage amount to cash and not to your son or another person/entity ?
Can I assign a portion of my death benefit to cash ? Generally no . A life insurance policy has a stated beneficiary or goes to your estate . It is hard to figure what you want cash for ? is it to pay something off ? to gift ? You can directly state such things in your beneficiary declaration . Basically the proceeds need to be assigned to someone or some thing -LRB- charity -RRB- or the proceeds are included in probate and distributed that way .
Can I assign a portion of my death benefit to cash ? Generally no . A life insurance policy has a stated beneficiary or goes to your estate . It is hard to figure what you want cash for ? is it to pay something off ? to gift ? You can directly state such things in your beneficiary declaration . Basically the proceeds need to be assigned to someone or some thing -LRB- charity -RRB- or the proceeds are included in probate and distributed that way .
There are actually two common but different ways to assign life insurance . The first way to assign is with assigning the beneficiary for a temporary purpose . An example would be a financial institution loaning a substantial amount of money may require a person to assign them as beneficiary until the loan is repaid . Once this loan is repaid the assignment of beneficiary would go back to the original beneficiary , unless specifically changed again by the policy owner . The second common practice of assignment of life insurance is to assign a new owner of a policy . This is most common with cash value life insurance which a parent or grandparent purchased on a minor child . A minor can not own a policy with financial decisions , so an adult , usually parent or grandparent , will be owner until the child becomes an adult . The assign is made from the parent or previous owner to the insured child as the new owner .
A split dollar life insurance policy is not a type of insurance , but a way of paying for and collecting on life insurance so that it benefits two parties , usually an employer and employee . The policy is taken out on the employee as a benefit , reward , and/or way to retain them . Premiums and benefits are `` split '' by the two parties . The way the split dollar life insurance policy works involves how premiums are paid , who owns the policy , and how to divide the death proceeds , cash values and/or dividends.There are two popular ways to structure split dollar life insurance . Both designate the employee as the Insured . 1 -RRB- Endorsement . The employer is the owner of the policy and endorses it so that some or all of the death benefit will go to the choice of beneficiary of the Insured , when the insured employee dies . 2 -RRB- Collateral Assignment . The employee owns the policy and collaterally assigns some of the death benefit to the employer as reimbursement for premiums paid . To find out the best way to structure split dollar life insurance for business or family purposes , it is important to have correct financial and legal advice . Call a reputable life insurance agent or agency to start working on your split dollar life insurance policy .
When you need to file a Homeowners Insurance Claim , the best and quickest way to handle it is to call the CLAIMS Telephone number listed on your Homeowners Insurance declarations page . Most carriers have a 24 Hour reporting line for claims ; the station is staffed by an individual trained to take an initial report and pass it on to the assigned claims adjustor based on the type of claim and geographical location of the loss . Once the preliminary report is taken , a claims number is assigned , an adjustor is assigned and the preliminary record is report to the National Database also known as CLUE ; CLUE is a tool used industry wide to review prior claims activity on homes . The CLUE report will later be updated eventual showing the Closed Status and total amount paid by the insurance carrier to resolve the claim . When making the initial claim report , it is beneficial to only offer a simple and general explanation of the nature of the loss ; it is always better to give all the details directly to the claims adjustor as the initial claims report is usually not taken by a person licensed and trained with the capabilities of the insurance adjustor.In most cases , the insurance carrier will assign and adjustor who will make an initial contact within 1 business day . The adjustor will make an appointment to come out and review the damages claimed , a detailed estimate of the required repairs will be prepared and the adjustor willinterpret the policy to determine if and to what extent coverage applies to the damage incurred ; the final process will be a resolution letter mailed to the insured with a full accounting of the situation and perhaps an associated check for repairs . In some cases , an initial payment may be offered holding back thedepreciated portion of the loss until thedamages or items are replaced after which the carrier will reimburse the insured for the full replacement cost of the items as long as the policy coverseverything on a replacement cost basis . Any specificquestions regarding a loss should be directly discussed with the claims adjustorwho is licensed and responsible to handle the complete transaction and explain the processto the insured . Prior to any claim occurrence , it may alsobe a good idea to contact a licensed insurance representative to learn the process and best recommended method of handling thesituation should youencounter a claim .
Medicaid allows persons going through a Medicaid spend down to hold onto a certain number of assets -LRB- $ 2,000 for an individual , much higher for a couple . -RRB- $ 1,500 of life insurance cash value in one policy is allowed in addition to that $ 2,000 limit . Let 's assume you are a widowed female in a nursing facility and your private funds are dwindling , so you are getting ready to go on Medicaid to pay your living and health care expenses . You have a life insurance policy with $ 10,000 cash value . What will happen to it ? 1 -RRB- You are allowed a final expense policy , so you could possibly assign that over to a funeral home or put it in a irrevocable trust to be used for funeral expenses . This would most likely be a feasible choice if the face amount of the policy is $ 15,000 or under . 2 -RRB- If the face amount is much larger than the cash value , you might be allowed to take a loan against your policy to get the cash value under the allowed amount , then use the loan to pay for your nursing home costs . That way you can still preserve your policy , even though you will be paying interest on the loan . 3 -RRB- In this example , there is no spouse , but if there was , you could transfer the ownership of the policy to your spouse , as long as it was compliant with Medicaid rules . If you have a disabled child , the policy could be transferred to a trust for them . 4 -RRB- You could convert your life insurance policy to a Long Term Care Benefit Plan that will enable you to keep a portion of the death benefit while legally using the policy to pay for your long term care costs . 5 -RRB- You could liquidate the policy and spend the cash on purchasing an allowable funeral policy or on your medical care .
The assignment of all or some a life insurance policy is often done as collateral security . The policy owner has the right to do this . There are many scenarios and planning techniques in which assignments are made . It occurs in split dollar arrangements and in situations involving indebtedness . To the extent that some amount of the death benefit was assigned to a third party , that party would receive that amount as a death benefit if death occurs during the existence of the agreement . Normally the assignment would be revocable meaning the policy owner can cancel the agreement at some point . But some estate planning methods involve irrevocable assignments . Policy assignments are also part of the process when a policy owner exchanges one life insurance policy with another . In order to ensure there is no gap in coverage during the process , an absolute assignment of the existing policy to the insurer that will issue the new policy is made . Completion of an exchange agreement with the insurer that will issue the new policy follows and then the new policy is issued before the old policy is surrendered .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
There is much misinformation spread about this topic . The former answer at least implies that a doctor can just `` decide '' whether to accept Medicare assignment or not . It is important to understand that this is only true if a doctor has signed a non-participating agreement with Medicare . Most doctors -LRB- approx . 97 % -RRB- are contracted with Medicare as `` participating physicians '' , and as such must accept Medicare assignment , i.e. the Medicare approved amount for the service as payment in full . Participating physicians are not permitted to bill any Part B excess charges . Next , the former example given is simply incorrect : `` if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . '' The truth is that if the doctor is contracted as `` non-participating '' with Medicare and chooses not to accept assignment , they are first penalized 5 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- $ 400 x 5 % = $ 20 penalty -RRB- . Medicare will only reimburse $ 380 for this example -LRB- $ 400 - $ 20 penalty -RRB- . The doctor can bill you up to 15 % of the $ 380 as an excess charge in this example , or $ 57 . In not accepting assignment , the doctor may bill/collect $ 437 -LRB- $ 380 Medicare reimbursement + $ 57 excess charge -RRB- . This gives the doctor the opportunity to receive $ 437 instead of the $ 400 Medicare assignment , which in effect is a 9.25 % increase in revenue . Non-Participating physicians can decide whether to accept Medicare assignment on a case by case basis , and often do accept assignment , because if they do not , Medicare reimburses the claim to the beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- , and the physician then must collect the reimbursement and the excess charge from the consumer in full . This adds administrative and collection costs that many non-Par physicians do not want to deal with . The former answer states that If you live in one of the states banning Part B excess charges , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . But the truth is that Part B excess charges are not a concern , let alone a major concern , regardless of what state you are living in . For the reasons stated , Part B excess charges are rarely billed . Ask any Medicare beneficiary when was the last time they received a claim payment directly from Medicare -LRB- required if doctor was non-Par and refused assignment -RRB- . You will be hard pressed to find anyone answering yes .
The pledge or assignment of all or some a life insurance policy might be made as collateral security . The policyowner has the right to do this . There are many scenarios and planning techniques in which assignments are made . To the extent that some amount of the death benefit was assigned to a third party , that party would receive that amount as a death benefit if death occurs during the existence of the agreement . Normally the assignment would be revocable meaning the policyowner can cancel the agreement at some point . But some estate planning methods involve irrevocable assignments . Policy assignments are also part of the process when a policyowner exchanges one life insurance policy with another . In order to ensure there is no gap in coverage during the process , an absolute assignment of the existing policy to the insurer that will issue the new policy is made . Completion of an exchange agreement with the insurer that will issue the new policy follows and then the new policy is issued before the old policy is surrendered .
An absolute assignment of life insurance is a way of transferring ownership and proceeds from the policy to another person or institution . Absolute assignment of life insurance is sometimes used as collateral when obtaining a loan , as the lender is repaid by the life insurance if the borrower dies . Some people use absolute assignment of life insurance as a way of leaving money to charity .
There are two types of assignment relative to life insurance . 1 -RRB- Absolute assignment . This is when the owner of the policy transfers ownership to another person , including all the rights to change the policy . E.g. . An absolute assignment might be used when parents have life insurance on their children , and wants their children to assume ownership of their own policies when they become adults . 2 -RRB- Collateral assignment . This is when a life insurance policy is used as temporary security for a loan . An assignment form usually is attached to the life insurance policy , authorizing the lender to collect the amount owed to them , should the insured person -LRB- borrower -RRB- pass away . The remainder goes to the Insured 's beneficiary named on the policy .
The Part B Excess Charge is the amount above what Medicare approves for a procedure or office visit . Providers can bill you for excess charges if they do not accept Medicare Assignment . Because the doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she is able to charge an additional amountthis is the Part B Excess Charge . The doctor , however , is limited to charging 15 % over the Medicare approved amount . To avoid excess charges it is important to understand Medicare Assignment . This term refers to providers who WILL accept full payment by Medicare . If a doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she IS allowed to bill you for Part B Excess Charges . To find out if your doctor accepts Medicare Assignment you can always call their office or visit Medicare.gov and locate the physician information . If you do n't like the idea of paying Part B excess charges , you can consider purchasing a Medicare Supplement plan to cover that expense . In 2014 , there are two plans -LRB- F , G -RRB- that have that benefit . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Good Day to you . There is no way to assign a portion of your benefit based on what you have provided however you might qualify for a life settlement . Life Settlements is basically selling your policy to get some cash . What happens if you qualify , is the owner and beneficiary would change . Upon death , the benefit would go to the new beneficiary/owner . I hope this helps . If you want more information , please reach out to me . Matt
Your Life Insurance policy will have the specifics of the `` Grace Period '' that provides and cushion for you when you miss a payment . Life Insurance companies usually want youto keep you policy . Their Grace Period is usually 30 to 60 days depending on the policy and the company . The type of policy will make a difference as well . A Term Life Insurance policy does not have any `` Cash Value '' or a side account that can grow at an interest rate like a savings account and cover the missed premium . This `` Cash Value '' is a feature of a Universal Life policy . The Term Life policy would be in danger of lapsing much quicker and you are probably going to cancelled quicker . A Universal Life policy with cash value is going to use the saving portion to pay the premium . The Universal Life will lapse once the cash value is depleted and the grace period expires . You can call your agent or Life Insurance company and work out options on the Universal Life policy such as lower the `` Face Amount '' or amount of death benefit to help you make the policy last longer . `` Whole Life Insurance '' will have a grace period as well . Coverage options beyond the grace period become more complicated . This Whole Life policy also has a `` Cash Value '' or savings portion as well . You will be subject to the policy 's `` Non Forfeiture Options '' within the policy . These options are different for each policy . You will have to check your policy . Usually , there are 3 options : Return of the cash value to you minus any loans you took out , you can change to a lower amount of insurance that is `` Paid Up '' or you do not have to pay premiums for the amount of death benefit , or you can change to a `` Term Life Insurance '' policy for a specific period of time then the insurance stops .
Whole life policies are well suited for needs that do not diminish over time . Some commonly found uses for whole life are : Family protection : To provide funds to support a surviving spouse and/or minor children , particularly for individuals who start a family later in life ; to pay final bills , such as medical or other estate expenses and federal and state death taxes . Business planning : Whole life insurance is often used for many different business purposes , such as insuring key employees , in split-dollar insurance arrangements , and funding non-qualified deferred compensation plans . Business continuation planning often involves using whole life insurance as a source of funds for buy-sell agreements . Accumulation needs : Some individuals will use the cash value feature of whole life as a way of accumulating funds for specific purposes , such as funding college education , or as a supplemental source of retirement income . Charitable gifts : To provide funds for a gift to charity . Whole life insurance , sometimes called permanent insurance , or ordinary life , is designed to stay in force throughout ones lifetime . As long as the policy owner meets his or her obligations under the policy , the policy remains in force , regardless of any changes in health that may occur . Unlike term insurance , where premium payments generally increase , as the insured gets older -LRB- the chance of death increases with age -RRB- , premiums for most whole life policies remain level . A portion of each premium payment is set aside to earn interest . Over time , a whole life policy will develop cash values . The accumulated cash values form a reserve which enable the insurer to pay a policys full death benefit , while keeping premiums level . During life , many whole life policies have provisions to borrow a portion of the accumulated cash value . If a policy is terminated without the insured dying , there are various surrender options for the cash value available to a policy owner . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
A participating whole life insurance policy pays annual dividends . The dividends represent the favorable performance of the insurance company and are the result of excess earnings investments , favorable mortality rates and savings on expenses . Dividends can be paid in cash , used to offset your premiums , or used to purchase additional paid up insurance which will increase your policy 's face value . The premium you pay to the insurance company is generally divided in three different ways . First , there is the actual `` cost of insurance '' . The cost of insurance is a specific charge associated with the death benefit that takes into consideration your age and `` rating '' when the policy was originally issued . Another portion of your premium covers operating costs and company profits . The final portion is put into the cash value of your policy . Another type of life insurance that will last your entire life is called Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- . An IUL is permanent life insurance that offers a death benefit and your premiums may earn interest and grow the cash value of the policy . What makes an IUL different from whole life is the way interest is credited to the policy 's cash value . IUL 's offer the ability to earn interest that is linked to the movement of a selected stock index over a specific period of time . With an IUL , your money is not participating directly in the stock market . If the referenced market index drops in value , you simply do not have interest credited for that year .
Medicare assignment in many ways works just like traditional health insurance assignment.When you visit a doctor or use medical services you are assigning your reimbursement rights to the provider . Medicare providers that accept assignment are paid by Medicare . When a provider does not allow assignment Medicare pays direct to you for services rendered .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Which Homeowners Insurance Company Is Best ?
The best insurance company is the company that pays the most when you have a loss . All insurance companies are companies that manage a pool of similar risks . Every insurance company is regulated by the insurance commissioner in the state where the company is organized and the state where the company is allowed to transact business . This combination of state supervision is designed to make sure that each company keeps their promises . There are rating bureaus that offer information concerning various insurance companies . These bureaus generally give higher ratings to larger companies with longer histories . They are rating the financial capacity of the companies . While this is a good indicator of which insurance company to choose it is far from the only criteria . Ultimately most people buy homeowners insurance from an agent . That agent might represent one company or one hundred companies . The point is that the relationship is not with the company as much as it is with the agent . People buy insurance from people that they trust . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . The agent will propose a company . Few reject the company selected by the agent . The role of the company is to keep the promises that it makes . There are a wide range of homes for insurance companies to insure . Some companies have an appetite for homes that are in the mountains or heavily wooded areas . Other companies will not even consider such a risk . Some companies will insure homes on bluffs overlooking the ocean while others wont consider such a risk . Underwriting will often have special rules regarding roof type , location of an evaporative cooler , presence of certain pets and presence of certain types of recreational equipment . There are many reasons for some of these underwriting decisions but the agent will be able to identify the best company for you . The underwriter will try to suggest appropriate coverages . Even if you had the most highly rated company if the limits selected are not adequate , you could be left with a large loss in the event of a disaster . For example , you might have a significant amount of jewelry , photographic equipment , or musical instruments . If these are not insured correctly their loss could represent a significant financial loss for you . The most significant area of underinsuring is liability . Your agent should let you know the highest amount that the company will provide . If you choose less coverage , any loss in excess to the limit in the policy will come out of your assets . Your agent should tell you about the availability of umbrella liability coverage . A lawsuit can make havoc out of the best financial plan . Finally the way that the company pays the loss when you have a claim is the most critical factor . Homeowners claims are infrequent but tend to be severe . It is important that the agent you have selected assists you during this critical period . Maintaining communications with you during a claim is an identification of a really good insurance company .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
The best insurance company is the company that pays the most when you have a loss . All insurance companies are companies that manage a pool of similar risks . Every insurance company is regulated by the insurance commissioner in the state where the company is organized and the state where the company is allowed to transact business . This combination of state supervision is designed to make sure that each company keeps their promises . There are rating bureaus that offer information concerning various insurance companies . These bureaus generally give higher ratings to larger companies with longer histories . They are rating the financial capacity of the companies . While this is a good indicator of which insurance company to choose it is far from the only criteria . Ultimately most people buy homeowners insurance from an agent . That agent might represent one company or one hundred companies . The point is that the relationship is not with the company as much as it is with the agent . People buy insurance from people that they trust . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . The agent will propose a company . Few reject the company selected by the agent . The role of the company is to keep the promises that it makes . There are a wide range of homes for insurance companies to insure . Some companies have an appetite for homes that are in the mountains or heavily wooded areas . Other companies will not even consider such a risk . Some companies will insure homes on bluffs overlooking the ocean while others wont consider such a risk . Underwriting will often have special rules regarding roof type , location of an evaporative cooler , presence of certain pets and presence of certain types of recreational equipment . There are many reasons for some of these underwriting decisions but the agent will be able to identify the best company for you . The underwriter will try to suggest appropriate coverages . Even if you had the most highly rated company if the limits selected are not adequate , you could be left with a large loss in the event of a disaster . For example , you might have a significant amount of jewelry , photographic equipment , or musical instruments . If these are not insured correctly their loss could represent a significant financial loss for you . The most significant area of underinsuring is liability . Your agent should let you know the highest amount that the company will provide . If you choose less coverage , any loss in excess to the limit in the policy will come out of your assets . Your agent should tell you about the availability of umbrella liability coverage . A lawsuit can make havoc out of the best financial plan . Finally the way that the company pays the loss when you have a claim is the most critical factor . Homeowners claims are infrequent but tend to be severe . It is important that the agent you have selected assists you during this critical period . Maintaining communications with you during a claim is an identification of a really good insurance company .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Amica Insurance Company is great for any of their products . Two of my former companies competed against them and we found them to be very ethical . They have an A.M Best rating of A + + which is the `` Superior '' financial strength rating given by Best . With specific regard to their homeowner product , for twelve consecutive years they have received the ` J.D. Power Award ' for `` Highest Customer Satisfaction Among National Homeowner Insurers '' . Hard to beat their track-record . I only wish they wrote homeowners here in Florida !
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Home Insurance can be changed at any time . A homeowner can cancel his or her insurance at any time and purchase a policy from another carrier . The unearned portion of paid premium will be returned to the Insured in an expeditious manner . A bank or mortgage company is not permitted to require a homeowner to purchase insurance from any specific insurance company . For homes not insurable under Preferred Home Insurance Programs , there are some Sub-Standard Programs which will accept homes which are not in the best of repair or which are declared a high risk to carriers , in the absence of an insurance market for the home , most States have a Fair Plan which will accept the risk sometimes on a Fire Only basis . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There are many excellent life insurance companies to choose from and the `` best '' is very subjective . One way to rate companies is by the financial ratings from AM Best or a similar rating company . I personally only use A rated companies or better , so my clients can feel confident that the life insurance company will be around 20 - 30 years or longer when the policy is needed . Many life insurance companies have been around over 100 years which is another testament to a stable company . A company may be the best for you because they offer a particular product with a unique rider that you want . Finally , a company that provides a better health rating , and therefore lower premium for your situation , may turn out to be the best for you . All of the above are reasons to work with a knowledgeable advisor to help you sort through the options and find the best company for your particular situation .
Homeowners Insurance is a form of Property Insurance . The Insurance Services Office publishes Insurance Forms which are basic coverage contracts sold asinsurance policies by insurance companies . Homeowners Insurance is the most common form of Property Insurance ; this form is generally written for Owner Occupied Single Family Homes but in some cases , it could apply to an Owner Occupied Duplex . To complicate matters further , mortgage companies do not differentiate the coverage form ; they simply define required insurance as ` Hazard Insurance ' ; the hazard being the risk or collateral against which the mortgage company has leant funds . If a single family home is owner occupied , a Homeowners Insurance Policy should be purchased ; if a 1 - 4 unit dwelling is tenant occupied , a Landlords Insurance Policy should be purchased . For residential apartments with 5 + units , a Commercial Form is required and in many cases can be written as a Residential Apartment Policy under a Business Owners Policy -LRB- BOP -RRB- package . For further clarification on the correct form of insurance , contact your insurance carrier or our office and we 'll be happy to answer any further questions .
There are two types of insurance that are known as mortgage insurance . When mortgage companies offer something other than a conventional loan they will often require the borrower to buy mortgage insurance which protects the mortgage company from default . There is also a form of life insurance which is designed to provide a death benefit that equals the balance due on a mortgage . Neither of these are the same as a homeowners policy . The homeowners policy protects the residence and contents against named perils . The homeowners policy also provides protection from personal injury and property damage lawsuits .
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
Which life insurance company is the best ? I think that depends on a few factors . Chief among them are the risk profile you present , and the type of product you want to purchase . At the end of the day , it becomes a question of which will give you the best underwriting . Your risk profile is characterized by the underwriting challenges you pose . I am sure you know that life insurance underwriting covers many factors . These include gender ; nicotine use ; current health ; medical history ; family medical history ; occupation ; avocation ; foreign travel history and plans ; lifestyle with regards to alcohol and drug use ; financial situation ; and criminal , financial , and motor vehicle record . Much to look at . And you know what ? In some way , shape , or form , all these factors can have an impact on your mortality . For most people , one or more of these factors are more operative than the others . Therefore you need to look for a company who will be most competitive in underwriting that particular risk factor . Some companies will be more competitive for diabetics . Some companies will be more competitive for people with a cancer history . Some companies will be more competitive for mountain climbers . Some companies will be more competitive for scuba divers . Some companies will be more competitive for people with a bankruptcy on their record . And on and on and on . It is the job of your broker to direct you to the right company . Also remember that companies tend to specialize in the products they manufacture . Some lean towards cheap term insurance . Others lean towards whole life insurance . Some lean towards guaranteed universal life insurance , while others lean towards interest-based universal life insurance . Once your broker prequalifies you and identifies the company that will give you the lowest cost for your coverage , you can then determine which product they make available that would make the most sense , given the life insurance strategy you want to employ . Important note : given that not every company makes available every type of product , you might have to re-think your choice of product once you find out which company will give you the best underwriting . But that is OK at least you will be getting the most value for your dollar .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Does A Life Insurance Policy Go Into Effect ?
If a life insurance policy is medically underwritten , it will go into effect after the policy is approved and issued and delivery requirements are received . If it is a No Exam policy , the policy can go into effect as soon as the policy is approved , which could be as short as hours after applying . You must be sure to have enough money in your checking account to be drafted as soon as a No Exam policy is approved .
Most life insurance companies also offer temporary insurance which can start when the application is submitted with a premium . Most carriers require 2 months premium payment and a signed temporary insurance agreement to put the coverage in effect . If the client does not take the insurance policy for any reason , or it is not approved , then they will get a refund of the initial premium .
Life insurance usually goes into effect after the policy has been accepted by the insured and payment received by the insurance carrier . Coverage can also be in effect in a temporary manner prior to policy issue while underwriting is in progress . Companies will accept a conditional receipt along with first month 's premium with the application and apply that coverage for 60 to 90 days depending on the company.Some will provide coverage from the application it 's self and others after the medical exam is completed . It can be different in many situations . Please read the temporary receipt before you sign it to see if it seems reasonable to you .
A life insurance policy goes into effect after the application has been submitted , the underwriting has been completed , the life insurance approval has been made , the policy has been issued , and the policy holder and insured person have signed any necessary delivery requirements and made the first premium payment by check or auto draft .
When the life insurance company has reviewed your application it will make a decision on whether to make you an offer , postpone the offer or decline the offer . If they offer you a price tag that you feel is fair , then you accept the offer , write a check for the modal premium agreed upon and sign the delivery requirements to put the policy in force .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , Bipolar Disorder effects the purchase of a new policy , but does not effect an established policy . In other words , being treated for Bipolar Disorder after the policy has been issued , does n't effect the policy . Unfortunately , when applying for a policy , Bipolar Disorder will effect the classification given a person for pricing purposes . Depending on the condition , it could also mean a decline . It is best to work with an agent who can access several companies and pre-underwrite the applicant to find the best possible situation for the applicant .
The answer to your question depends upon the context of where you are getting your health insurance and the type of health insurance you are getting . If your health insurance is being provided by your employer the answer will vary depending upon that company 's personnel policies and can even very for classes of employees -LRB- e.g. - hourly versus salaried -RRB- . As such your coverage could effective date could range from your date of hire to some date after you have completed a probationary/waiting period with that employer . The business owner , their Human Resources person or their insurance broker should be able to provide you with this group specific information . In 2014 and after , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- requires that an employer can not impose a waiting period of more than 90 calendar days from the date of hire for a new hire to be enrolled or to waive participation in the company 's group health plan . For practical purposes many employers are moving to a personnel policy of a new hire being covered on the first of the month following 60-days after being hired . Individual major medical insurance will go into effect on a first of the month basis . Though the first of what month will depend upon when you apply for coverage . The ACA require that enrollments received on or before the 15th of the month become effective the first of the next month . Applications received after the 15th of the month will become effective the first day of the following month . Bear in mind that as of April 1 , 2014 you are essentially unable to enroll in individual major medical insurance for the rest of 2014 unless you experience a change of life status event -LRB- marriage , divorce , loss of other coverage are common examples -RRB- . Short Term Major Medical insurance is not subject to the ACA restrictions and applicants have much greater flexibility in choosing the effective date of their coverage which can range from starting at midnight of the day they apply to some other date the applicant indicates they want their coverage to go into effect . Marlin McKelvy Consumer Directed Benefit Solutions www.cdbsagency.com
Traditionally , life insurance becomes effective after the policy has been issued , you have paid the first premium with a check , and signed and returned the delivery paperwork . However , there are some variations on that . E.g. . If you have applied for a No Exam policy over the phone or internet , your policy may go into effect as soon as they draft the first premium . In a nutshell , life insurance coverage is effective when you have been approved , everything has been received by the insurance company to put it in place , and they have acknowledged it as being in effect .
If you are asking if life insurance is effective immediately after filling out the application , the answer is usually no . Unless you paid ahead of time , the policy must be approved , issued and the first premium and all delivery paperwork returned for it to go into effect . This process can take from hours -LRB- with some no exam plans -RRB- to months . If you are asking if life insurance is effective immediately after satisfying those requirements , the answer is `` maybe '' . if death occurred while the check and signed delivery paperwork are in the mail , it is a legal issue whether the life insurance company would pay the benefit . Legally , the effective date is the date the policy is actually in effect , and this is after the check and delivery requirements have been processed by the insurance company .
To buy life insurance for your parents , I suggest that you first sit down with them and discuss the prospect of buying life insurance . You may need to speak from your heart , explaining that you worry how you are going to be able to give them the send off they deserve when their lives end . Keep in mind that they may be embarrassed if they can not afford to buy life insurance for themselves . Or they just may find it too painful to think about . With a loving approach and clarification about who is paying for the policy , this conversation will pave the way for a smooth purchase . When you are ready to shop , be sure to get the list of medications your parents take , their health history , height and weight , and other relevant information . Then you can call websites that offer Senior Life Insurance . Most people who are buying life insurance for their parents get a policy that does not require an exam . For final expenses such as funeral , you will want a permanent policy that is sure to be in effect when your parents pass away . You also want to get one where the price is locked in , so that it does not become unaffordable as they age . Applying will require that they sign the app , and they may need to do a phone interview . Most people choose to have the premium drafted when approved , so that the policy goes into effect within a very short time . It is a good thing you are doing . Best wishes !
Some important provisions in most life insurance policies are as follows . These are regulated by state code and the insurance company , so can vary . 1 -RRB- Grace period . This is a period that your policy will stay in effect if you neglect to pay your premium on time , usually one month for term insurance . With permanent insurance , the policy may stay in effect longer if cash values automatically go to pay the premium . 2 -RRB- Suicide clause . This is a clause stating that the insurance policy will not pay out the death benefit for two years after the policy goes into effect . 3 -RRB- Convertibility . Some Term policies can be converted to permanent life insurance without evidence of insurability , if the conversion is done within a certain time period before the term ends . 4 -RRB- Incontestability clause . This protects the consumer by requiring that payment of the death benefit can not be contested two years after the policy goes into effect . 5 -RRB- Guarantees . Premiums , death benefits , interest rates , and cash values can all have guarantees in some types of policies . It is important to check the guarantees when purchasing a policy . 6 -RRB- Settlement options . Upon death of the insured , this provision allows the death benefit to be paid in one lump sum , in monthly payments , or some other way . 7 -RRB- Loans , reduced paid up , etc . There are many number of provisions associated with permanent policies that do not apply to term insurance . 8 -RRB- Riders . Riders provide added features to policies that the policy owner desires . Usually , riders cost extra .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
The answer will depend upon whether you are talking about group health insurance or individual health insurance . Employers have a certain degree of flexibility in establishing a waiting period before a new hire can become eligible to enroll in the company 's group plan . Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- now in effect this waiting period should not exceed 90 calendar days from your date of hire . So , this establishes a maximum waiting period under an employer based plan but the employer can choose to have a shorter waiting period . If you are applying for individual health insurance during the open enrollment period or following a change of life status event it will depend upon when you have submitted your enrollment form . If your enrollment form is received on or before the 15th of the month your coverage should go into effect on the first of the next month -LRB- e.g. - February 10 submission would be for a March 1st effective date -RRB- . If your enrollment form is received after the 15th of the month your coverage would become effective on the first of the following month -LRB- e.g. - February 18th submission would be for an April 1st effective date -RRB- .
When I work with clients sometimes a question we have to work through is when the effective date will be . In many cases , this is due to another policy which is going to be replaced if the offer from the company applying with is acceptable . You have the ability to communicate with the company to let them know what date you would like the policy effective . Some companies will make the effective date the day you received the policy , signing the delivery receipt . Explain your situation to your broker/agent so you can strategize the best options for yourself .
Life insurance goes into effect after the first premium has been paid and the delivery requirements have been signed . If you purchased a No Exam policy , the company may draft the first premium and the policy might go into effect very quickly , as soon as a day or two after applying . If you applied for a policy that required exam and medical records , it could take as long as 6 months for the process to be completed and the policy to go into effect .
There are some life insurance policies that can be purchased as quickly as one day . When applying for very large face amounts , and/or if an exam and medical records are required , the time that it takes the policy to go into effect can be weeks or months . To get life insurance most quickly , use a No Exam Life Insurance policy and ask the usual time it takes to go into effect , as some are much more speedy than others .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
To answer the question of how to apply for life insurance , I would need to know the type of policy for which you are applying . 1 -RRB- Medically Underwritten This is the type of policy that requires some type of exam , and possibly the life insurance company will order your medical records . Applying for this type of policy requires that a fairly lengthy application be completed . It may be filled out on paper , digitally or over the phone . You might do it with your agent , with your paramed examiner , on your own , or with a representative of the insurance company . Once everything is collected by the underwriter , the company decides what to rate you , and you generally accept the policy by paying the first premium . Because there are so many different types of medically underwritten policies , there are a number of variations on how to apply for them . 2 -RRB- Simplified Issue Simplified Issue policies do not require an exam . Some never require medical records , while others order medical records as needed . Filling out the applications for simplified issue life insurance has about as many choices as medically underwritten applications . However , these policies tend to go into effect much more quickly , and it is often their practice to draft the first premium as soon as you apply or are approved . 3 -RRB- Guaranteed Issue Guaranteed Issue Life Insurance does not ask any health questions and has no medical requirements at all . It does not usually entail a phone interview , although applications are usually done face to face with an agent . Generally , these policies are graded and should go into effect within days .
No . Term life insurance policies are designed to provide only the promised payment on proof of death provided for in the policy . Term life policies do not build up cash value in the same way that Permanent life insurance policies -LRB- Whole or Universal Life -RRB- can do . The closest you could come to getting money back from a term life policy would be to purchase one with a `` Return of Premium Rider '' that provides for the refund of the premiums you have paid during the term -LRB- time period -RRB- the policy was in effect and then expired while the policy holder was still alive . Of course , you do pay extra for this rider so in effect you are paying the insurance company money that they can invest and earn from while the policy holder will receive only the total amount of premium paid . When you take inflation into account over a period of 10 , 20 or 30 years that term policy might be in effect you really end up losing value compared to conservatively investing that same money -LRB- for the return of premium rider -RRB- over that same time period . If you ware wanting a life insurance policy that builds up cash value that you could access at some future date then you should shop for a Whole or Universal Life insurance policy of some type .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Cover A Stolen Car ?
If you bought just liability coverage it will not pay if your car is stolen . It just depends what you selected when you bought your coverage . All states require at least a minimum amount of liability coverage before you can legally drive a car . You do not have to have insurance coverage that will pay to repair or replace your own car but you do have to protect other people 's property that you might damage with your auto .
If your asking will renters insurance cover a stolen car the answer is no . Auto insurance comprehensive coverage will cover a stolen car . If you asking if any of your personal items left in the car are covered for theft then the answer is theft from a vehicle is a covered peril . Now it would depend on what the item actually was that is in question and will the stolen item meet the deductible . Also if the auto was damaged during the incident you could potentially have two claims . One one the auto for the damage to the vehicle and on for your personal property that was in the vehicle . Also please note , items permanently mounted to your auto are part of the auto .
The short answer is that unless the car is stolen , or parts of the car are stolen , theft of items from a car are not covered . You 'll seek this coverage from your homeowner insurance . If your car is stolen there is a small amount of coverage that comes from the auto after 48 hours . As usually , check with your local agent or insurance company to see how they have written your policy but what I have described in the common policy construction . Auto policies are not designed to coverage your personal property .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
Assuming the GPS was stolen from inside an insured auto , the answer is maybe . If the GPS was installed in the car -LRB- e.g. , permanently attached in the dashboard -RRB- and the car had comprehensive coverage , then the GPS theft would be covered subject to the comprehensive deductible . However , if the GPS was of the type like mine that you affix to the windshield with a suction device , that would not be considered `` installed equipment '' and would not be eligible for the car 's comprehensive coverage . In that case , your only other possibility for coverage on the auto insurance would be if your policy provided additional coverage for personal items inside the car . Most standard auto coverage forms do not include additional coverage for personal items , but some do - usually capped at $ 1,000 - $ 2,000 . Also , your auto policy may have an added endorsement that provides coverage for personal items . The last resort - you may be able to claim the GPS theft on your homeowners -LRB- or renters policy -RRB- if the auto policy does not cover it .
Car insurance will pay for a stolen car as long as you have comprehensive coverage . Comprehensive coverage covers the vehicle for damages not resulting from a collision accident . For example , fire , theft , glass breakage , a tree falls on the car , ect . If you car is stolen the insurance company will determined the blue book value and pay out the blue book value less your deductible . Kelly Blue Book is a good site to use to determine the value of your car . If your car is still financed and there is a gap in coverage you may end up stilling owing the finance company . Gap insurance is available to cover this need .
As a general rule , most homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for personal property that is stolen from a car . The stolen property will be subject to your property deductible and depending on the type of property stolen , your policy may have a limit to the coverage amount provided . For example , money , jewelry , electronic devices , and other `` high value '' items are typically limited to a maximum coverage amount of $ 500 - $ 1,000 unless your policy includes increased limits through an endorsement . As a side note , your auto policy may also include a small limit of coverage for property stolen from the vehicle .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
When your car is damaged it is covered if you have physical damage coverages . Comprehensive covers claims that come from damage other than collision . The car will be repaired minus the deductible . The contents stolen from the car , however , are not covered by the auto policy . For the items in the car to be covered they must be covered by a homeowners or renters policy .
If you car is stolen and not recovered then the insurance company , providing you have comprehensive coverage , will determine the actual cash value of your vehicle and then write you a check for the stolen vehicle . You will have to relinquish the title over to the insurance company . If you had a loan on the vehicle the loan will be paid off first and you will receive what ever is left . If you do not have comprehensive coverage then you have no coverage for the loss . If you car is recovered then it will be determined if the car is repairable or a total loss depending on the condition the car is found in . Most insurance companies will wait 30 days to see if the car is recovered or not then just call it a loss at that point if the car is not recovered .
Like Edward has already answered , car break-ins are covered if you have the vehicle insured with Comprehensive -LRB- also called `` Other Than Collision '' coverage . Keep in mind thought , if anything is stolen - typically only those things permanently attached to the vehicle are covered under the auto policy . If a purse , laptop or other personal property not attached to the vehicle is stolen - most carriers cover these things under a homeowners or rental policy and are subject to that policies deductible and limits . So if your care gets broken into , you could be facing two claims and two deductibles unfortunately . Check with your local independent agent to verify your policy 's specific language .
I do n't know what state you are in , but I can answer this as respects Florida auto claims . The insurance is on the car and a temporary driver -LRB- who has permission to drive the car - meaning that it was n't stolen -RRB- would have coverage . In Florida the minimum liability for auto damage is 10,000 . If there was insurance on the vehicle that hit your son , that policy would cover at least 10,000 in property damage to your son 's car .
No , if your car is broken into and personal items stolen from it , there is no coverage for those items . Your car policy , so long as you have Comprehensive Physical Damage coverage , will take care of the damage caused to your car in the act of this crime . You will need to file a police report of course . Next turn to your Homeowners ' , Condo Unit Owners ' or Renters ' Insurance policy for coverage for your stolen belongings .
Car insurance will provide coverage if your car is stolen so long as your policy includes Comprehensive physical damage loss along with your chosen liabiulity protection . So long as you have comprehensive , the settlement for your stolen car would be handled from that by your claims professional . In order to file such a claim , it is very likely that your claims professonal will need to have a copy ofthe police report .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
Renters insurance does not cover vehicle theft . Vehicle theft would be covered under your auto insurance policy provided you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy . However , if you have a renters insurance policy and some of your personal items were in the vehicle that was stolen they may be covered by your renters policy as long as the items are personal items and not part of the vehicle .
Renters Insurance would take effect in the event of a loss to your personal property as well as peronal liability . If someone broke into your home your renters insurance would cover the stolen items , if the building were to burn down renters insurance would cover your personal property , also if you were to have your car broken into and items stolen those items would be covered under your renters insurance .
Personal property stolen from your vehicle may be covered , depending if a rider was added to the policy or the property is permanently attached . This situation is fairly common in my 33 years in the business as an auto insurance broker . Typically , your home insurance policy covers these items , but each situation is different . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier auto insurance broker and owner of several consumer websites that offer the lowest car insurance prices to consumers .
In a word , yes , auto insurance does provide coverage for vandalism . This coverage is provided by the pysical damage portion of your policy under `` Comprehensive '' or `` Other than Collision '' and will be subject to your deductible . In most cases , in order to settle such a claim , your insurance company will want to receive a copy of a police report along with an estimate of the damage . By the way , if something is stolen from the inside of your car - your phone , clothing or golf clubs to name a few examples , these are NOT covered by your car insurance policy . Personal property loss is covered by your Homeowners ' , Condo Unit Owners ' or Renters ' Insurance policies so be sure to have these .
Yes , there is coverage under the comprehensive portion of your auto policy . In order to receive payment the amount lost must exceed the deductible and it must be the result of damage to the car . After market items such as radar detectors are not always covered depending on how they are installed . Personal property located in the car is covered by your homeowners policy , again subject to the deductible . Professional equipment or business property is normally not covered . If you are a part time photographer and advertise on the internet dont turn in a claim for a room full of camera equipment stolen from your Honda Fit .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get Group Health Insurance For Self Employed ?
Technically you ca n't in all but a few states . To form a group under the regulations of virtually all states you have to have an employer-employee relationship which at a minimum requires two people , the employer and at least one common law employee -LRB- generally a W2 status employee -RRB- . Colorado and Delaware do appear to be states that make provisions for a self-employed person to purchase health insurance on agroup contract basis . This is one of the issues the Affordable Care Act essentially dealt with beginning on January 1 , 2014 when it 's provisions eliminated pre-existing condition exclusions and being declined for coverage in the individual and group marketplaces . So , other than the fact that the open enrollment season concluded on March 31st , 2014 there is now no legal prohibition preventing a self-employed person from getting individual health insurance . This does not mean , however , that states have changed their individual laws regarding eligibility for group contracts and to the best of my knowledge no states have changed their policies in this regard . There are still a few industry association group health plans in existence but they have become increasingly rare over the years . For most self-employed persons reading this answer your best option and generally your only option will be to purchase individual health insurance .
Technically you ca n't in all but a few states . To form a group under the regulations of virtually all states you have to have an employer-employee relationship which at a minimum requires two people , the employer and at least one common law employee -LRB- generally a W2 status employee -RRB- . Colorado and Delaware do appear to be states that make provisions for a self-employed person to purchase health insurance on agroup contract basis . This is one of the issues the Affordable Care Act essentially dealt with beginning on January 1 , 2014 when it 's provisions eliminated pre-existing condition exclusions and being declined for coverage in the individual and group marketplaces . So , other than the fact that the open enrollment season concluded on March 31st , 2014 there is now no legal prohibition preventing a self-employed person from getting individual health insurance . This does not mean , however , that states have changed their individual laws regarding eligibility for group contracts and to the best of my knowledge no states have changed their policies in this regard . There are still a few industry association group health plans in existence but they have become increasingly rare over the years . For most self-employed persons reading this answer your best option and generally your only option will be to purchase individual health insurance .
Most people who are self employed need to pick up an individual policy . This would be considered a self employed health insurance policy . There is no set difference or requirements between a person who is employed and has to pick up his own insurance or a self employed person . There could be a difference as far as tax being deductible since a self employed person will usually file a Schedule C . An HSA qualified plan is a great way to purchase health insurance if you are self employed due to the tax advantages . Ask your tax adviser .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
No , not exempt as such . Whether you get your health insurance through an employer based plan or whether you are self-employed and purchase your own individual health insurance can have tax implications for you though . Generally , in today 's employer based insurance environment the employee is paying some portion of their individual and/or dependent health insurance premiums . And , in most such cases the employer is taking your share of the premium out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis under a Section 125 Plan . The employee is receiving a tax advantage in this context as their share of their premium is taken out of paycheck on a pre-tax basis thus reducing their taxable net income and reducing the amount they pay in taxes . For the self-employed this issue gets more complex and you should seek the advice of a CPA or tax attorney . Health insurance premiums a self-employed person can be deducted or expensed depending upon how your business is structured and what your individual situation is . As is always the case when we 're talking about taxes it 's more complicated than the very simplistic answer that I have given and that is why you should seek professional advice on this matter .
Yes , you can usually get Disability Insurance if you are self employed . It will depend on your health and occupation ; you will need to be approved , similar to applying for Life Insurance . Self employed people must rely on themselves if they are disabled , so it is very important to have Disability Insurance as a self employed person .
Assuming that you are asking if you can be self-employed and be on Medicare , the answer is yes ! In fact , there are many seniors that are self-employed , and the number seems to be increasing . There is also a separate tax deduction for health insurance if you are self-employed . This includes health , dental and long-term-care coverage for you and other family members . And there 's some good news . Last May , the IRS announced that Medicare premiums were also tax-deductible -LRB- subject to specific limitations and restrictions -RRB- . And you do not have to itemize on your tax return to get the deduction . Reputable websites that are operated by experienced brokers can offer additional specific information that may be helpful . You can also view quotes from top carriers and easily apply for coverage .
Health insurance for the self employed is no different from any other health insurance plan . There are no `` special plans '' or discounts applied to premiums if you are self employed . You can buy an individual major medical plan or in some states you may qualify for a group health insurance plan .
Well , Yes and No . You can always deduct your individual health insurance premiums on your Schedule A , Itemized Deductions , on your income tax form along with other eligible medical expenses . The catch is -LRB- there always is one is n't there ? -RRB- that you have to itemize your deductions -LRB- which you are probably doing as a self-employed person -RRB- and that thanks to ObamaCare your total deductible medical expenses now have to exceed 10 % of your income before you receive any tax benefit . This is generally a pretty high bar to clear for most self-employed people and so the net effect for most self-employed persons is that they receive little or no tax benefit . But as some politicians seem to like to point out , you did n't really build your business . So , why should you get a tax break ? And someone has to pay the taxes to provide for the subsidies for other people 's health insurance or Medicaid coverage . We all know that everyone who owns a business is rich so why not you ?
If you 're self-employed , you 're generally getting your health insurance coverage from one of two places , the individual market or your spouse 's group coverage , if available . Individual health plans can be purchased on or off the health insurance exchanges . If you qualify for a subsidy , you would want to look at health insurance ON the exchanges - subsidies can only be used for on-exchange policies . Your employer may also have a group health insurance plan available to you - you would generally need to talk to your HR representative to get information on plan availability .
If you are self employed and you contribute to your own health insurance plan then the tax code allows deductions for `` contribution to a self employed health insurance plan . If you work a corporation and you are a W-2 employee your employer can sponsor a Health Insurance Plan , like a `` cafeteria plan '' and your contributions are paid with `` pretax dollars '' . The complication arises when you have incurred expenses and you want to deduct those expenses to reduce your tax then the expenses can not be deducted because your contributions to the plan are paid with `` pretax dollars ''
In some situations you are allowed to deduct health insurance premiums on your tax return . The most common method is for those with self employed income and it they file a Schedule C . There is a place on the form to enter your health insurance premiums and deduct them from your self employed income .
Yes , Long Term Care Insurance qualifies for self employed health insurance , as a tax deduction . The deduction is taken on form 1040 , line 29 , and is for the self employed person , their spouse and their dependents . The maximum long term care insurance annual premiums that are allowed to be deducted per person are based on age and are as follows : Under age 40 - $ 350 Age 41-50 - $ 660 Age 51 - 60 - $ 1,310 Age 61 - 70 - $ 3,600 Age 71 + - $ 4,370
The question as phrased sounds like you 're asking `` How much life insurance is automatically given to firefighters when employed as such by a city or county ' ... If that 's what you 're asking , I do n't know that any insurance is automatically given to them anywhere . In most cases there will be a Group Life Insurance program offered to firefighters wherever they are employed , and that will typically have an upper limit . Also in most cases the firefighter will have to pay the premium them self . Some city and counties may pay for a certain amount of insurance . Firefighting may be considered a hazardous vocation and may therefore require slightly higher premiums . That said a firefighter may purchase as much life insurance as they qualify for , -LRB- based on health and age -RRB- , want and can afford .
Disability Insurance premiums , if paid by the `` employer '' -LRB- and in this case you as the self employed -RRB- , would create a TAXABLE benefit to the insured should a claim occur . But because you are a Self Employed Individual , Individual disability income insurance premiums paid by a Sole Proprietor are not deductible , and the benefits received are tax-free . If you would like to see an insurance company answer to your question , click on the following link for Mass Mutual 's overview : WEBSITELINK
If you purchase your coverage through an employer , you may have the option to utilize a 125 plan to have pre-tax dollars withheld from your pay check to pay your premiums . However , for the vast majority of individuals purchasing their own coverage , insurance premiums are paid for with taxable dollars . One exception to this rule is anyone that is self employed , who is allowed to write off the cost of their health insurance on their tax return . However , even in such a case , the self employed individual must still FICA/self-employment taxes on these funds .
Self employed individuals have many options when it comes to retirement planning . You may consider a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . HR 10 or Keogh plans are also an option for self employed individuals if your business structure allows it . There are also simplified plans , including simplified 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans for small business owners .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
If you 're self-employed , you 're generally getting your health insurance coverage from one of two places , the individual market or your spouse 's group coverage , if available . Individual health plans can be purchased on or off the health insurance exchanges . If you qualify for a subsidy , you would want to look at health insurance ON the exchanges - subsidies can only be used for on-exchange policies .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does renters insurance cover bed bugs ?
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
A homeowners insurance policy will not typically cover for a claim cause by bed bugs . Bed bugs would be considered a vermin which is normally excluded from coverage within a homeowners policy . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that may be contained within .
The nature of a renters policy is to compensate you for damages that you suffer . An infestation of bed bugs might not meet the criteria of damages . The policy pays these damages for specified perils and insect infestation is either excluded or not included in the list of most policies . The renters policy is not designed to address routine maintenance issues .
Renters Insurance does not cover bed bugs . Insects and vermin are a common exclusion on all property policies . This situation would call for an exterminator . If you are unsure and have additional questions I always recommend you contact your local independent agent who can assist you with these type of questions and more . Also an independent agent can help find you the right policy for your needs .
Bed bugs are considered a vermin . Typically all homeowners and renters insurance policies do not cover vermin along with other specified exclusions . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusion that it may contain or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
I ca n't specifically speak for Geico because I do n't represent them and I have n't read their policies . I can however , speak from 22 years in this business as both a captive and an independent agent with many years of advanced education . There are usually two coverage forms that are used in renters policies , Broad Form and Special Form . Broad Form lists which perils you 're property is insured against and insects are not one of them . Special Form covers everything except what 's excluded and insects are excluded so , in general , no , bed bugs would not be covered . The fact that this question had to be posed here is testament to why you need a good agent . A good agent would be able to answer such a question and , if he/she could n't , they could find out and would get back to you quickly . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . Even if they cost a little more , they 'll save you big dollars in the long run .
A homeowners policy is designed to pay for damages to your residence . The list of perils that the company insures against is lengthy but insects are specifically excluded in most policies . Eradication of bed bugs is not a covered loss under the policy . It is certainly a condition that should be corrected .
The key to understanding Homeowners coverage is the word damage . While an insect infestation is messy and expensive it rarely results in damage . The language in your homeowners policy probably excludes damage caused by insects . There is a provision for unsuspected termite damage but rarely anything for bed bugs .
Things like bed bugs and other insects -LRB- under the designation of vermin -RRB- are typically excluded from coverage under renters and homeowners policies . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Renters or homeowners insurance will not cover bug infestation of any kind or damage caused by insects . Any damage or infestation caused by insects , rodents and vermin are excluded from property polices . If you have a specific scenero I always recommend you discuss the details with your local insurance agent .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
No , that is generally not a covered peril . A homeowners policy would not cover any type of extermination , bats , bugs rats or otherwise . A homeowners policy is designed to cover natural perils such as fire , wind , hail etc. . Some homeowners policy will cover a broad range of perils but usually things like bats would be excluded . Check with your agent and make sure .
you can expect the unexpected to hit Renters just the same as home owners . Both for example would have an exposure to fire and it may mean that the renter is more exposed to fire than a homeowner . With a renter you have no real way of knowing that the guy who lives below you smokes while going to sleep , but you are exposed to that . Additionally you liability issues that actually may be greater than a single family insured customer because of something in your lifestyle that makes you more likely to be a danger to your neighbor > Back in the 1970 's it was not uncommon to see young people using water beds . But you can imagine the problems that might ensue form a water bed falling apart in the way of creating a liability to the neighbor who lives below you . Many apartment management companies have therefore have gone to requiring some level of protection you offer them with your renters policy .
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
Your comment made me laugh ! And yes , I can answer your great question like a five year old , I 'm a master of simple ! An annuity is a way of putting money aside now to spend later . You get them through insurance companies . Once you put the money in it , you should n't touch it . It sits for many years growing and waiting for you . Once you get old and need it , you tell it you are ready to get paid . It will then start paying you every month until you a. -RRB- use it up b. -RRB- pass away or c. -RRB- your surviving spouse passes away -LRB- you pick one when you get it -RRB- . They are a way of making sure you have money during your retirement . They are not a good idea for everybody - -LRB- like riding a bike without training wheels for the first ever bike ride -RRB- some people have trouble with their bills , and setting aside lots of bill money could be a bad thing , so they have to do what is called a ` suitability study ' first . It will help figure out if it is a good thing . If the person you talk to does n't do one , they are bad - run away ! And some of them are filled with hiding fees and costs , that eat away like bad bugs at your money while it is away , so you have to be careful and ask ` pacifically what the costs are in total for the annuity . If it does n't cost too much , it is a good thing . There are lots of types , so ask about all of them and take notes before you even think of giving them your money , k ? I hope that helps , please realize that is greatly simplified . But the bottom line is that the right annuity can be a great part of your retirement plan . Please feel free to contact me for more details , or to answer any lingering questions , okay ? Thank you for the ` funnest ' question I have ever gotten to answer here !
Infections acquired during a hospital stay are a growing problem . Due to the sterile environment , only the strongest `` bugs '' -LRB- viruses and bacteria -RRB- can survive . Hospital infections are considered just like any other illness and will be covered by Medicare . With that in mind , hospitals may not bill Medicare if they readily admit their liability .
In all honesty the ACA or Obamacare as you call it , is n't going anywhere . It 's here to stay as it has been very successful getting off the ground . It will evolve over time to fix the bugs that are in it , but going away ? Nope . Here 's the thing I have been an insurance agent just about 28 years . Every one of those years there was some sort of change involving health insurance , every one . The ACA is simply just another plan change .
To prepare for your life insurance exam , I agree with Matt 's advice . In addition , drink lots of water ahead of time , and try to avoid extremes -LRB- e.g. do n't overeat , overdrink , overexercise , or hang around heavy smokers -RRB- the day before your exam . If you do n't feel well , put off your exam , especially if you have diabetes , MS or other health conditions that can be exasperated by having a bug . Finally , be prepared to answer health questions that you may have answered before . Asking the same question more than once helps convince insurance companies that the information is correct .
That 's a great question ! It is important because young adults are exposed to a great number of health risks . They are new drivers , and their risk of being injured in an accident is higher ; They are involved in sports and activities in school , which often lead to injuries ; And they are exposed to many passed bugs in their school environments . They often are working first jobs , and trying new things . In such an atmosphere of change and risk , health insurance just makes sense . thanks for asking !
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get Health Insurance As A College Student ?
First , check with your college 's office of student affairs or administration and see if they have a student health insurance plan . Due to the requirements of ObamaCare many of these plans have been cancelled or are being phased out but some do still exist . Next , you can be covered as a dependent on your parent 's health insurance policy until age 26 so if you have recently lost or will be losing coverage when you start school you could possibly be added onto their plan . Regarding true major medical individual health insurance you are pretty well locked out until the next open enrollment period starting on November 15th and the earliest you could be covered would be January 1 , 2015 . This is unless you have what is called a change of life status event -LRB- marriage , divorce , child birth or adoption , losing other coverage -RRB- in which case you have a 60-day time frame to apply for individual health insurance coverage . If you are in good health and coverage for any pre-existing health conditions is not a major concern for you then the best solution for immediate coverage would be to apply for a short term medical insurance policy . These policies are pretty affordable and depending upon the insurance carrier they may issue a policy that runs for a period just short of one year and you can often reapply for coverage . If you reside in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi contact me and I 'll be happy to help you out with this . If you reside in another state seek out a health insurance broker or go online and do a search for Short Term Medical . Assurant Health and United Healthcare/Golden Rule have pretty good short term policies and , of course , you would want to check with the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan in your state . Other than Medicaid that pretty well sums up your options as a student .
The most important thing for a college student to understand is that life insurance is issued on the basis of age and health . Normally young people can demand very low premiums for life insurance . The advantage of starting a life insurance policy when young is that there are fewer health concerns . The second thing that a college student should understand is that life insurance is all about statistics . If they have had a class in statistics understanding life insurance should be easy . There is a very large pool of people who would suffer significant loss if they died . They pool their risk so that those who experience this unfortunate event can be compensated by the very small contribution from the vast majority that survive . Inherent in this idea is that the probability of death increases with every passing year . This makes the amount each member of the pool pays into the pool increase each year because more of the participants will die in a given year . The third thing a college student needs to know is that life insurance companies are corporations that are based on the idea of legal reserves . Even though they know that a certain percentage will die of a particular age group they must maintain reserves in the unlikely event that the death rate is higher for some unknown reason such as war . These legal reserve companies are admitted to do business by the various state insurance commissioners . Their reserves are monitored closely to make sure that the companies can keep their promises . The fourth thing a college student needs to know is that even within a specific age there is a wide variation of health . I had classmates who died in their first year of college . One classmate died of a medical condition . This variation is like a bell-shaped curve . Most of the people are in the middle of the curve and are considered to be standard risks , however some are better than average and some are worse than average . Life insurance companies hire underwriters to evaluate the deviations and assign premiums that reflect how different the individual is from the standard risk . The reason that this is done is to maintain the risk pool and make sure it can keep its promises . The fifth thing a college student needs to know is that since life insurance is all about statistics the companies can develop a wide variety of life insurance plans . Some may appear superior while in fact their costs are comparable . There is merely a different design to the plan . For example a student could buy a one year term life policy for $ 500,000 for very little in premium . For a multiple of the premium he could buy a $ 500,000 whole life policy . Neither is good , nor bad . They are just different . The whole life policy will remain in force at the same death benefit for the lifetime of the insured without changing the annual premium . The one year term policy will either cancel or renew at a higher premium at the end of the policy year . If a person knew when they were going to die , they could choose a policy that would maximize benefits . However few of us have that information . The sixth thing a college student should know is that life insurance will probably form the foundation of their financial plan in the future . For this reason it is wise to select a life insurance agent who can service you for the foreseeable future . That doesnt mean to select a peer but rather someone with whom you can mature . The advice of the life insurance agent could be very important as you mature and your needs change . At some point you will probably own a great deal more life insurance . Family , debts and retirement all play a role in determining how much life insurance to carry . The final thing that a college student needs to know is that companies work hard to develop a reputation but the relationship with an agent trumps everything . If you have a good agent , you will find them to be very valuable in the future .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
A college student would most likely purchase life insurance to pay off education loans in case of death , to prevent that burden from falling on the shoulders of someone else . Also , a college student might want to lock in a good rate while young and healthy , or start planning for a future of raising a family . The life insurance company will look at projected income for the occupation for which the student is being educated , and the amount of time left until the degree will be completed , to help in determining how much life insurance a college student can get .
Many college students today are in a position of having to take out thousands of dollars in student loans in order to finance their educations . In many instances , parents are co-signers on these loans . In the event of the college student 's untimely death , parents might not only have to grieve the loss of their son or daughter , but also have to deal with repayment of the student 's debt . To me this , together with the cost of final expenses -LRB- funeral , unpaid medical bills , etc. -RRB- , is the most obvious reason to purchase life insurance coverage - so that in the event of death , your loved ones wo n't have to be burdened with raising the funds to repay the debt . Another reason to go ahead and buy life insurance is that in all likelihood , the cost of the insurance will never be lower . Life insurance is age-rated . Assuming that you are in good health , do n't smoke , etc. , a college student can buy term life insurance coverage very , very affordably - under $ 200 per year for $ 100,000 of coverage is common . You can even lock in that low premium for up to 30-years with many life insurers .
The key component of college funding is the FAFSA -LRB- Free Application for Federal Student Aid . -RRB- Every college bound student and returning student must complete this form each year to receive any assistance . Every source of income used to pay college expenses must be included . Whether you cash in a life policy or take a loan the effect is the same , it drives up the familys expected contribution amount and thus reduces access to financial aid . Accumulating money for college in a life insurance policy is a great idea but get advice before you start withdrawing the money . It is probably better to use the money to pay off loans in the final year and beyond because it would not be included in any eligibility computation .
Car insurance for a college student is often very cheap , depending upon where you live and the type of vehicle you are insuring . Your age , the vehicle , your driving record , and the liability limits and deductibles will all help determine the rate . Also ... a good student discount can potentially reduce premiums and save hundreds of dollars . Other available discounts can also save money , including a reduction if you are more than 300-500 miles from home . How do you get the lowest auto insurance rates for college students ? Let an experienced broker search and compare multiple companies and you 'll save money , time and an immense amount of frustration ! LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several of the nation 's top-rated car insurance websites that offer the lowest prices for consumers . Online quotes in about a minute .
What is the best health insurance for college students ? Going to depend on the situation . First is the student still on the parents plan ? Review your current coverage to see how it would work for out of network coverage , assuming the student is out of the area . If not leaving the plan area , no worries . Kids can remain on parents plans now till age 26 . Most universities REQUIRE a student to have health insurance . They have their own limited plans that they will add onto the cost of your education . The only way to waive this required coverage is to show coverage elsewhere . Student insurance is not awful , but most only provide coverage while enrolled . Summer break you may be on your own . Check your plan booklet .
If you are asking about life insurance , it is a good idea to get life insurance as soon as you get a job and can pay for it . While federal student loans are generally discharged if the borrower dies , PLUS loans and private loans may become the responsibility of the surviving spouse and/or parent -LRB- s -RRB- . Even if you do n't have student loans , your parents may have tapped out their resources putting you through college , so having a final expense policy would be nice in case of tragedy . Of course , if you have a spouse and/or children , life insurance is very important . Again , it is easy to get reasonably priced life insurance for most recent college graduates . Many underwriters will also allow you to get more coverage than you first qualify for , based on expected increase in earning . Please let me know if we can help .
First , check with your college 's office of student affairs or administration and see if they have a student health insurance plan . Due to the requirements of ObamaCare many of these plans have been cancelled or are being phased out but some do still exist . Next , you can be covered as a dependent on your parent 's health insurance policy until age 26 so if you have recently lost or will be losing coverage when you start school you could possibly be added onto their plan . Regarding true major medical individual health insurance you are pretty well locked out until the next open enrollment period starting on November 15th and the earliest you could be covered would be January 1 , 2015 . This is unless you have what is called a change of life status event -LRB- marriage , divorce , child birth or adoption , losing other coverage -RRB- in which case you have a 60-day time frame to apply for individual health insurance coverage . If you are in good health and coverage for any pre-existing health conditions is not a major concern for you then the best solution for immediate coverage would be to apply for a short term medical insurance policy . These policies are pretty affordable and depending upon the insurance carrier they may issue a policy that runs for a period just short of one year and you can often reapply for coverage . If you reside in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi contact me and I 'll be happy to help you out with this . If you reside in another state seek out a health insurance broker or go online and do a search for Short Term Medical . Assurant Health and United Healthcare/Golden Rule have pretty good short term policies and , of course , you would want to check with the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan in your state . Other than Medicaid that pretty well sums up your options as a student .
That is a great question ! Many colleges require a minimum amount of health requirements , especially when it comes to immunizations . We are required by the Federal Government to have health insurance coverage , and because so many people do n't have coverage , yes , many colleges do require it . The last number I saw was approximately 35-40 % of Colleges require health insurance coverage -LRB- ACHA 2008 study , if I remember correctly - I have kids in college -RRB- . That number may be higher by now . Having the requirement allows the school to lower their liability , and helps protect the student body . If you need insurance , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thank you for asking !
-- > Normal 0 Before college students consider purchasing renters insurance , which I would refer to as tenant-homeowners insurance , I suggest they make the effort to find out if they are already afforded coverage by their familys homeowners or tenant-homeowners insurance . Students who maintain their primary residence as their familys home should be considered insureds under their parents policy . As an insured , their personal property should be covered anywhere in the world and in particular , at a temporary residence . In many cases , the coverage afforded by the familys policy will better than coverage they could buy on their own . Thats the first place I would check and I would get the response confirmed in writing . There may be limitations and deductibles to consider but in most cases the basic coverage should be adequate to cover most situations . Personal liability coverage should be available as well . For students who are no longer residents of their parents household -LRB- emancipated -RRB- or for parents who fear the impact of claims on their coverage , a separate policy could be considered . Insurers may be more reluctant to cover students on their own while at school but coverage should be available . A good place to start may be the parents insurer or agent . Basic policies with a $ 10,000-15 ,000 personal property limit should cost $ 200-300 a year . Coverage will be limited to specifically named perils , deductibles will apply and property will be covered for its actual cash value -LRB- not the cost to replace an old item with a new one -RRB- . If replacement cost coverage is available , I suggest you consider adding it .
You do n't . Very few colleges or universities have programs that prepare a student for a career in the insurance industry . That 's not to say that a bachelor 's degree would be useless , especially if it 's a degree in business administration it would certainly help you understand the bigger picture of risk management and the various areas where it can apply and why . But there are many very successful people in the insurance industry that either do n't have a bachelor 's degree at all or have a degree in a field that was totally unrelated to insurance . Insurance carriers probably prefer candidates with a college education and in today 's job market they can be choosy if it suits their corporate agenda and image . The major insurance consulting firms that deal with large businesses and complex risk management issues can certainly make the case that a bachelor 's degree and perhaps even advanced degrees -LRB- MBA , PhD -RRB- are necessary for the kinds of work they do . And I 'm sure some insurance agencies feel the same way . But as a 30-year veteran -LRB- admittedly college educated -RRB- very little of what most people learn in college will ever be applied in working with small and medium sized businesses and individuals on their various insurance needs . That 's the kind of training you will have to get in the real world of actually learning the products of the specific segment of the insurance industry you are working in and learning from the school of hard knocks . What 's really crucial in today 's insurance world is that you bring the capability to continually educate yourself , learn from others and regularly update your industry knowledge and skills as the insurance world is very dynamic and evolving rapidly .
That is a good question ! Typically college students are under age 30 and therefore are in the best class as far as insurance premiums go . When a person is young and healthy is the very best time to implement a Whole Life , Cash Value insurance policy . So really the first thing a college student needs to know about life insurance is that while Term insurance is really cheap , it has no cash value to the policy holder ever , unless it has a accelerated benefit rider . In that case it will pay a percentage of the death benefit to the policy holder in the case of critical or chronic illness where the client can not perform at least 2 of the essential daily living tasks . Otherwise the only benefit to anyone other than the insurance provider is in the case where the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary . Also regarding Term insurance , as the name implies , it will end at the completion of the term , ie : 10 years ; 20 years ; 30 years . And then it will be much more expensive to buy another term . Whole Life is more costly in premium than Term , but still much less when you are young and healthy . There are a variety of kinds of Whole Life policies , but with `` Straight Whole Life '' premiums are guaranteed not to increase over the life of the policy , so in actuality it is more affordable than Term over the long haul . And the premiums you pay into Whole Life build cash value that you can use without ever paying taxes on ! Contact me for more information .
When can individuals enroll after May 1 , 2014 ? Here are the Qualifying Life Events that will allow an individual to purchase health insurance before January 1 , 2015 Loss of minimum essential coverage Marriage , birth , adoption Gain citizenship or qualifying immigration status Enrollment errors by Marketplace Qualified health plan violates its contract Change in eligibility for tax credits and/or cost sharing Move Enrolled in non-qualifying employer coverage Lose employer coverage Student graduates college and loses student health plan
Actually cash value life insurance does not effect FASFA . One of the few things that is n't asked for when determining a family 's ability to pay towards a child 's college tuition costs . Speaking as a father of two college students , I ca n't tell you how pleasant it was not to have to disclose cash values when completng the FASFA online . Another hidden benefit of cash values .
You can certainly get renters insurance to cover belongings in a dorm room , but you probably do n't need it . Most college students would be covered by their parents homeowners policy when they leave for college , so renters insurance would n't be necessary . I would recommend you have your parents check with their agent and make sure , but nearly every homeowners policy would have this coverage .
Children are not exempt from life insurance for many reasons . First life Insurance is based on age health and risk , children can be insured very cheap because in most cases they are healthy and are insurable . Policies can be structured early on to pay for college tuition , and living expenses such as a car to drive back home or buy a home around the community they go to college at . Which gives them a head start in their career being the home would go up in value while in school , And has a high sales ratio because new students are moving in every year.These are just a few reasons to mention the child would still have a retirement income at age 65 and a death benefit God forbid if something happened to cause death . In my studies this is what the rich do . John Cole Virtual Financial Group Recruiter / Manager Understanding Living Benefits v/s Life Insurance - Annuities . #colemarketing
In addition to the other great answers above , I would add that a college student should know that they can usually get life insurance based on their future earnings . Just because they are in school and not making an income now , does not usually exclude them from getting a policy .
The best health insurance for young persons is a policy that covers their conditions -LRB- if any -RRB- at the lowest available price . Often , that is either a `` catastrophic '' or `` Bronze '' plan . However , the `` Silver '' and `` Gold '' plans may be better options if there are expensive medications or ongoing procedures . Getting unbiased and professional help will save you hours of research and money ! There are specific plans set up for college students and persons under age 26 . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier health insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates for young adults .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is A Good Health Insurance Plan In Virginia ?
A good health insurance plan is the plan that will best serve your specific needs . Suitability is an important factor in figuring out which plan is best for you . Two questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan type that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? Under the Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or your employment was terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much !
A good health insurance plan in Virginia is any plan that covers your medical bills ! Health insurance is very complicated and cheaper is not always better . Here are some tips when comparing different health insurance plans . First , make sure your doctor is part of the insurance network . Second , choose a deductible and co-insurance percentage you can afford . Third , check the co-pay and find out the maximum out of pocket expense . The maximum out of pocket expense is the most you will pay in any one year . Once you have this information you can compare rates and select a plan that 's right for you and your family .
The cost of life insurance in West Virginia is usually the same as in the rest of the United States . To get an actual quote for life insurance policies for residents of West Virginia , you can visit a website that offers instant quotes and input different ages , face amounts and term lengths . However , these quotes are for the healthiest people ; the cost of life insurance for persons with health problems can be much higher . Calling the website or a local agency is the best way to find out the cost of life insurance in West Virginia for you .
A good health insurance plan in Virginia is any plan that covers your medical bills ! Health insurance is very complicated and cheaper is not always better . Here are some tips when comparing different health insurance plans . First , make sure your doctor is part of the insurance network . Second , choose a deductible and co-insurance percentage you can afford . Third , check the co-pay and find out the maximum out of pocket expense . The maximum out of pocket expense is the most you will pay in any one year . Once you have this information you can compare rates and select a plan that 's right for you and your family .
Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield is one of the oldest and strongest health insurance companies - Anthem products are available for sale in a number of areas . Owned as part of the Wellpoint group . In Virginia , Anthem is available in all areas west of Route 123/Chain Bridge Road . Anthem has one of the largest provider networks in the state of Virginia and allows access to the Blue Cross/Blue Shield network nationwide , so you dont have to worry about your coverage when you travel . The network includes over 94 million members and has in-network benefits at nearly 90 % of physicians and 80 % of hospitals nationwide . The network re-pricing discounts just for being a member average more than 48 % per claim , saving you money even when you havent met your chosen deductible . Anthem 's new plans under the affordable care act are the HealthKeepers plans -LRB- bronze , silver , and gold plans - Anthem BCBS does not offer catastrophic or platinum level plans -RRB- . These new plans feature more comprehensive benefits than before and include a range of deductible options to suit everyone 's budgets and no charge for preventative care . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Genworth Financial , Inc. is a Fortune 500with more than $ 100 billion in assets , domiciled out of Richmond Virginia and has a worldwide presence in 25 countries . Its first policy was written 1871 , under The Life Insurance Company of Virginia . Genworth is a major manufacture of life insurance , annuities and long term care insurance .
Medicare Region C includes the states Alabama , Arkansas , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi , New Mexico , North Carolina , Oklahoma , South Carolina , Tennessee , Texas , Virginia , West Virginia , Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands . This and other regions are designated for the purpose of supplying Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- for Medicare .
Agree with everything Ed said . In addition to liability coverage , West Virginia also has a rather strange uninsured motorist coverage requirement ... . In most states , uninsured motorist and under-insured motorist are both either required , or they are not . In West Virginia , uninsured motorist coverage is required , but under-insured motorist coverage is optional . WV requires the same coverage for uninsured motorist as they do liability : 20K per person , 40K per occurrence for uninsured motorist bodily injury and 10K of uninsured motorist property damage .
Your questions refers to `` different provinces , '' but I would supposed you mean `` different states '' except you reside outside the United States of America . Now back to your question , Auto Insurance Rates are influenced by several factors in different states or localities . Among them is claims experience in that state or locality . If you are a single male aged 20 and live in lets say New York city and lets say 500,000 vehicles were involved in some sort of collision , theft or vandalism in 2014 and your college friend lives in some city in West Virginia where all you see is farm land and few cars . Total number of vehicles involved in any collision , theft or vandalism are 500 in 2014 . Then question that is posed is what is the probability of your vehicle being in a collision in West Virginia ? The answer is very low and as a result you pay low premium as compared to your friend who lives in New York . Insurance is all about probability .
Some of the largest health insurance companies in the country are : 1 -RRB- United Health Group -LRB- United Health One/United Healthcare -RRB- 2 -RRB- Wellpoint -LRB- Anthem -RRB- 3 -RRB- Aetna 4 -RRB- Kaiser 5 -RRB- Humana 6 -RRB- Cigna 7 -RRB- Coventry 8 -RRB- CareFirst One of the big network names is Blue Cross / Blue Shield - Anthem and CareFirst feature this in Virginia and a number of other states .
When you are not in a `` guaranteed issue '' period , applying for a Medicare Supplement will entail passing the underwriting requirements established by the insurance carrier . In other words , you may be denied coverage if the insurance carrier is not willing to take on the risk of covering you due to your health condition at the time of application or in your past . There are Supplemental policies available with very light underwriting requirements -- for example , in Virginia , AARP Medicare Supplements through United Health Care . However , the premiums for these plans are quite high .
In Virginia Shingles vaccinations are covered by Medicare Part D Rx coverage , with or without a copay depending on the plan . For those on an employer group plan or individual plans , some carriers will cover the immunization under Preventive Care with a minimum age limit -- starting at 50 in some cases , 60-65 in others . You should check with your insurance company or benefits manager . Benefits under Preventive Care are provided with no copay or coinsurance .
In Virginia , you can get an insurance policy and file an SR22 which would allow you to get your license back . You have to check with DMV to see what fines need to be paid but you can get insurance . DMV will inform you how long the SR22 is required but in most cases it 's between 1 - 3 years .
In a very general nutshell , Medicare in Virginia covers hospitalization and skilled care in a nursing facility under Medicare Part A , doctor services and durable medical equipment under Medicare Part B , and prescription drugs under Medicare Part D. Part A and B cover more than stated , and Medicare Advantage Plans , or Medicare Part C , will cover some of the gaps . There are also other supplement plans that each have their own features that they offer in Medicare coverage .
It depends on where you live and the type of policy you have . In certain states you have to purchase separate Wind/Hail coverage so hurricane coverage is not included . In Virginia , wind/hail coverage is included in most policies unless you live near the coast . Coastal policies typically excluded wind/hail coverage or they will have a separate deductible . For example , you may have a $ 1,000 standard deductible but a 1 % - 5 % named storm or hurricane deductible . A percentage deductible is a big difference so make sure you are aware of what your policy includes .
I am puzzled by your statement `` one can not damage their own property and submit a claim '' . What happens then if someone runs a stop sign or a red light and hits another car and the guilty party is charged with failure to yield right of way '' . This scenario probably happens once a day in every state and I was unaware that West Virginia has such out of touch insurance laws . I thought the driver could have his company , subject to the deductible , repair his car . The real question in your scenario is the school district best advised to file a claim because their Commercial policy is going to have to pay the claim on both sides of the equation , Also , the driver of the bus has no legal standing because he is driving the school district bus with the permission of the school district but the school district has the right to file or not to file
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
The cost of homeowners insurance is determined by several factors . Location , type of house , condition of the property , claim history and personal credit are some of the major factors . In Virginia , homeowners insurance typically ranges between $ 400 - $ 1,800 per year . In Maryland , rates are typically between $ 600 - $ 2,500 . In South Carolina , homeowners insurance is very expensive especially if you live on the coast . Insurance rates in Hilton Head , SC can exceed $ 5,000 for a modest home .
Life insurance proceeds are taxable if they are left to the estate of the policy owner . However , if the beneficiary is a person , that person receives the life insurance benefit income tax free . If they decide to take it on payments , only the interest is taxed . Federal estate taxes will be charged if the estate -LRB- including life insurance proceeds -RRB- exceeds $ 5,250,000 in 2013 . West Virginia does not have a state estate tax .
Virginia does not require you to carry car insurance as long as you pay an uninsured motor vehicle fee to the state . New Hampshire and Mississippi will offer vehicle owners the option to post a cash bond . All other states will require you to maintain auto insurance to operate a motor vehicle on the roadways .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can I Have Medicare And Medicaid ?
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second . If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Medicaid does n't actually `` take '' your life insurance . You just ca n't qualify for Medicaid assistance if you have more countable assets than Medicaid allows . In most states $ 2,000 is the total allowed to qualify for Medicaid assistance . Checking and savings accounts , retirement money , cash value of life insurance , etc. all count against you when qualifying for Medicaid . Many people will cash surrender their life insurance to qualify for Medicaid . You can also irrevocably assign it to your funeral home and it will be exempt but must be all used for funeral expenses if you do that . An actual funeral preplan life insurance policy that you purchase from a funeral home is always exempt from Medicaid .
Medicaid share of cost is a special kind of Medicaid program used in only a few states . I am not aware of a Medicare share of cost . Medicaid share of cost is for those who have too much income or assets to qualify for Medicaid . They have a share of cost factor based on their income and medical bills . When your medical bills equals your share of cost during the month , Medicaid picks up the rest of your medical bills for the remainder of the month .
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second.If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second . If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
No . If you have full Medicaid assistance you no longer need a Medigap Supplement policy . Everything that is not covered by Medicare will be covered by Medicaid . However you should make sure you are on full Medicaid . There are some people who get Medicaid assistance that pays their Medicare Part B Premium and RX assistance but does not pay their Medicare co-pays or deductibles .
In the vast majority of situations the answer is no . Medicaid is a state-run insurance program designed to help low income persons pay for their health care . As a general rule you must not be able to afford to pay for private health insurance in order to qualify for Medicaid . However , this is a government program we 're talking about so there are always some exceptions buried in the fine print . This is where things can get complicated and the rules can vary from state to state in some situations . Some state Medicaid programs will assist in paying private insurance premiums for a person who can not fully pay them . A low income person who has recently lost their job and their health insurance through their former job may be eligible for assistance in paying their COBRA premiums in some states . You would have to check with your state 's Medicaid office to learn what the rules are in your particular state . Also , you have a limited amount of time to apply for such assistance after losing your job in states that provide this type of assistance so time is of the essence . Medicaid also has a special program for people diagnosed with AIDS that may qualify them for premium payment assistance . Once again , you will need to check with your state 's Medicaid office to determine what their policies and procedures are for qualifying for such assistance .
That is an excellent question !! Medicare is managed by a department of the Federal Government called the CMS - the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . It falls under the wing of the Department of Health and Human Services , and it manages the trust funds that fuel Medicare and Medicaid . There are two trust funds - one that is funded by payroll taxes , and by other taxes , investments , and earned interest . The other one is funded by Congress , premiums paid on Medicare B and D , investments and interest earned . Congressional cuts to the programs have hurt one fund , and the one that is funded by the payroll taxes is in danger of becoming underfunded within the next 20 years -LRB- 2029 , last estimate , with the additional funds culled from excesses in the program recaptured by the Affordable Care Act , AKA Obamacare - without them , 2024 -RRB- because the workforce is steadily shrinking -LRB- less collected tax -RRB- as the number of senior citizens eligible for Medicare and Medicaid increases -LRB- approximately 10,000 people turn 65 daily -RRB- . It does n't help that the Government in the past has raided the Social Security and Medicare trusts to fund other things that they felt were more important . I hope that that answers your question , if you would like more detail give me a buzz , and I 'll give you more . Thank you for asking !
-- > Both Medicare and Medicaid are insurance programs provided by the government for the most vulnerable groups to illness and injury . Both programs receive money from the federal government , but Medicaid is actually managed by the individual states . Medicare is for those over age 65 and with certain medical conditions while Medicaid is for anyone with limited income . Individuals needing to sign up for Medicare must do so through the Social Security administration . The Medicare website provides excellent information on the various benefits and additional coverage that may be available . Those interested in applying for Medicaid can now do so through their state or federal health exchange website or call center . -- > Normal 0 false false false EN-US X-NONE X-NONE -- > -- > / * Style Definitions * / table.MsoNormalTable -LCB- mso-style-name : `` Table Normal '' ; mso-tstyle-rowband-size :0 ; mso-tstyle-colband-size :0 ; mso-style-noshow : yes ; mso-style-priority :99 ; mso-style-parent : '' '' ; mso-padding-alt :0 in 5.4 pt 0in 5.4 pt ; mso-para-margin-top :0 in ; mso-para-margin-right :0 in ; mso-para-margin-bottom :10.0 pt ; mso-para-margin-left :0 in ; line-height :115 % ; mso-pagination : widow-orphan ; font-size :11.0 pt ; font-family : `` Calibri '' , `` sans-serif '' ; mso-ascii-font-family : Calibri ; mso-ascii-theme-font : minor-latin ; mso-hansi-font-family : Calibri ; mso-hansi-theme-font : minor-latin ; -RCB-
Medicare is insurance coverage for `` medical care '' and does not cover the costs of assisted living facilities or long-term care facilities -LRB- custodial care -RRB- . Medicare will however cover qualified healthcare costs while a Medicare beneficiary is living at an assisted living facility . Medicare is more often used to pay for a skilled nursing facility or home health care . There are always exceptional circumstances that will allow Medicare to cover different types of care , for example , while in a qualified stay at a skilled nursing facility a Medicare beneficiary may also receive custodial care , but in most cases Medicare wont cover the costs of `` custodial care . '' In some states , Medicaid will pay for some of the costs associated with assisted livingif a qualified beneficiary has a limited income . Medicaid is designed to help seniors and some individuals with disabilities pay for healthcare when they are unable to pay for it themselves . Check on qualification requirements and available waiver programs for assisted living with your state Medicaid department . Individuals should seek out an extended care insurance specialist to understand options and formulate a plan to financially address assisted living or long term care needs before any such care may be needed . Jeffrey J. VanCleve 800-211-0017
Medicare does not take life insurance from anyone . Medicare is a healthcare insurance program for those who have paid into it over the years -LRB- and some others -RRB- . Medicaid is an assistance program for those who have low income and low assets . If a person applying for Medicaid has term life insurance , it will not matter . If the Medicaid applicant has permanent life insurance with high cash value , there may be a need for the policy owner to take actions with the policy to enable them to be approved for Medicaid .
Medicare is a government entitlement program adminsered by the federal government . Medicaid is a State entitlement program adminstered by the State . In most cases Medicaid is secondary to Medicare . Medicaid is `` means tested '' where Medicare is age based at age 65 or `` disabled '' for 24 months and drawing social security in order to qualify for Medicare
People who qualify for free Medicare Part A are persons who have paid Medicare taxes through their employment for at least 10 years , and are age 65 . Those who are in the US legally , but have not paid into Medicare that long , can pay a premium for Part A. Medicare is also available to some persons with Lou Gehrig 's Disease or End State Renal Disease . And people who have been on Social Security Disability for two years can get Medicare . Medicaid is for persons with low income and very few assets . So the guidelines to get Medicaid are completely different than Medicare .
Yes . You can transfer the ownership of your life insurance policy to someone else . One reason that people change ownership though is to try to keep it from counting as an asset when qualifying for Medicaid . In those cases , it only works if you transfer it 5-years or more before applying for Medicaid . You can transfer the ownership to a funeral home for a 1st day exemption from Medicaid but you do n't want to do that with a large policy because Medicaid will get any money that is not used for the funeral . You can also transfer the beneficiary from one person to another .
Medicare and Medicaid are designed to cover medically necessary exams , diagnostic procedures and treatment protocol for illness or injury . Medicare and Medicaid cover a wide range of treatment including doctor exams , therapy , medication , surgery , hospitalization , emergency care and much more . There are no death benefits associated with Medicare or Medicaid .
You can , but this is actually pretty rare . It is illegal for any agent to sell you a Medigap policy if they know you are on Medicaid . This is asked on every Medigap insurance application , so if answered truthfully , you would generally not be able to purchase a Medigap policy . Some Medicare beneficiaries purchase a Medigap policy , and then at some future point become eligible for Medicaid . Since Medicaid essentially provides the benefits provided by the Medigap policy , the Medicare/Medicaid beneficiary may suspend their Medigap policy for as long as they are on Medicaid . They technically still have Medigap , but in a suspended status .
No . Medicare and Medicaid are two separate programs . Medicare is a health insurance program designed to help provide affordable healthcare for seniors age 65 and above -LRB- as well as individuals with certain disabilities or ESRD who qualify -RRB- . Medicaid is a government program that helps those with low income who have difficulty paying for health care -LRB- and/or do not have the resources to do so -RRB- - Medicaid can be accessed by people of all ages .
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services -LRB- also known as CMS -RRB- is a US Department of Health & Human Service agency . They are responsible for running several federal health care programs with Medicare and Medicaid being the 2 main programs . Medicare is a federal health insurance program that you are eligible for at age 65 or if you qualify from a disability . Medicaid is a federal and state run program . It provides health care services for certain individuals who qualify based on their income .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Borrow Against My Life Insurance ?
That is a great question ! If the following things are in place , then yes , you certainly can . - It must be a whole life policy . Term life policies have no cash value to borrow from , it 's part of the reason they are so cheap . - you must be the owner of the policy . - the policy must be in force for a few years . Typically , the first 2-3 years of your policy 's life the cash value is very small , as the premiums paid cover the cost of the insurance for the company . - the amount that you borrow falls within the limits set by the policy . Many companies will limit the amount that you can borrow , to limit the risk that the loan balance with interest does not allow the policy to go belly up . If you can meet all of these criteria , than chances are very good that you can have a tax free check in your hands in just a couple of days ! Thanks for asking !
When taking money from a Life Insurance Policy you need to consider the impact on your policy when you take a withdrawal or a loan . Both are available within your policy providing you have the cash value available . A withdrawal is taking money out of the cash value , with no intention of putting it back into the policy . The death benefit will be reduced in most cases as well as the remaining cash value . As long as the withdrawal is less than the money you have paid into the policy , there should not be a taxable event . If you do exceed the money you have paid in , then you will have to pay taxes on the amount over . On the other hand , a loan is a great option especially if you want to pay back the money taken . Look at your policy to understand the loan provisions . There is a fixed rate and most likely a variable rate . Depending how the policy credits money , and what the expected future growth might be , will determine which loan option may work best . Sometimes clients will take a withdrawal up to the cost basis , the premium you have paid in , then switch to a loan to minimize any tax burden . Like mentioned on the other comments , if you have a loan and the policy lapses , you will a potential taxable event which at the end of the current tax year , you will get the appropriate statement/form from the insurance company . Please consult your agent/broker prior to making any decisions .
The short answer to the question is YES , and depending on the type of policy this is a very good practice . I like to refer to this strategy as '' Financing Yourself To Wealth '' . You may borrow from the cash value of your life insurance policy providing you have sufficient funds available in the cash accumulation account of your policy . TERM life policies do not have a cash accumulation account and will not work for borrowing against the cash that has built up in your account . To learn more about these strategies visit me at WEBSITELINK
There are two types of life insurance : - 1 - Term Insurance - these typically do n't have cash value -LRB- some may have a return of premium at the end of the term -RRB- . 2 - Permanent Insurance - these include whole life , universal life , indexed universal life & variable life . These will typically have some level of cash value associated with them . The policies with cash value typically do have a loan provision -LRB- check with your agent or policy language -RRB- . Those policies with this provision will usually allow to borrow up to 80 % of the cash value . Word of caution ... if you borrow and do n't pay back any monies , the remaining cash value will be used to keep the policy active . When that cash value is exhausted the policy would lapse or you may receive a bill for a large amount to keep the policy going . This could also create a tax event on the monies you originally borrowed .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
At no time in the life of Term policies do they have cash value to borrow against , so no you can not borrow against a term policy . Additionally you can not use a term life policy as collateral for a loan as you can with a Whole Life policy . Credit term policies are designed to pay off a debt in the case of death of the debtor before the credit is repaid . On the other hand , Whole Life policies have cash value , grow wealth tax free , may be used as collateral and may be borrowed against . Contact me for more information .
Is borrowing against a policy a good idea ? Yes , it can be , it can depend though . Keeping the policy in force is important as it creates some tax advantages on the funds borrowed as you are essentially taking a part of your death benefit early for use elsewhere . Where borrowing against your life insurance is a good idea is in what steps you have to take to do compared to other avenues . Have you ever sat in a bank office cubicle while someone else decides if your need is worthy enough ? How they have to decide if your need fits ? A great thing about borrowing against your value is you simply make a call and the money is wired to your bank account . You are not asked to explain your need , your need is not subjected to review by somebody else . Simply put , what you want to do with those funds is not subject to the approval of somebody else .
You can borrow against permanent life insurance -LRB- also called cash value life insurance -RRB- policies that have enough cash value for borrowing . The two major types of permanent life insurance are Whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life includes fixed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . It is imperative to make sure that you do n't borrow too much from the policy and cause it to lapse . A lapsed policy with a loan against it can result in tax implications for the policy owner .
Borrowing against a 401k is both a yes and no answer as to debt . No it is not traditional debt as showing against your credit score or debt to earnings ratio , because you are borrowing your own money . It is debt as Jim mentioned , because it must be repaid within 9 months . The tax and penalty consequences are much worse than borrowing the money from a lender . It is never advised to borrow from your 401k because you are borrowing from your own future . A simple rule is if you need money today while you are able to earn an income , you will need money when you are old and sick and ca n't earn an income .
If you have permanent , cash value life insurance , yes you may borrow against it . Be aware that some policies will end up lapsing if you borrow too much on them , so be careful and check . If , on the other hand , you have an Equity Indexed Universal Life Policy , you should have the highest appreciation in your equity for borrowing purposes . Some , like some products sold by Premier Financial Alliance , actually do not go down at all when the stock market goes down , but only go up -LRB- with caps -RRB- , as the stock market goes up . These can have he largest amount against which you can borrow , totally tax free . I highly recommend these products . See your PFA agent . Glad to help . GARY LANE . garylane@cox.net . 7144229616 . Thanks .
Only the owner of a permanent life insurance policy can borrow against life insurance . Term insurance does not have cash value , so only those who own Whole or Universal Life will have the cash value from which to borrow . If the owner and insured person are two different people , the insured person can not borrow against the policy . That privilege belongs only to the policy owner .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Globe Life Insurance Work ?
If the Globe Life Insurance Company is admitted in your state it falls under the supervision of your insurance commissioner . One of the commissioners responsibilities is to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . The Commissioner has several methods of achieving that but the bottom line is that promises are routinely kept .
I could not find any indication that Globe Life is associated with CMFG , but called Globe Life to confirm . Their representative said that if your policy is with Globe Life , your statement should say Globe Life . It may be that you have a policy with `` globe '' in the product title , or got your policy through Global Credit Union ?
That is a great question ! Globe Life is a subsidiary of Torchmark , A Fortune 500 financial services company . they were originally Liberty National Insurance company until 1980 when they acquired Globe Life , and formed the torchmark holding company . My best guess would be that they have a portion of that company that handles their banking , that most likely goes through CUNA , -LRB- Credit Union National Association -RRB- , the marketing group for your mysterious CMFG -LRB- CUNA became CMFG in 2012 -RRB- . Or CMFG bought a part of Globe 's life business , which is a fairly common practice - The big financial companies buy/sell blocks of mortgages and other investments that may include life insurance policies in order to earn more money themselves . It may be that the CMFG people -LRB- who sell services to credit unions and consumers -RRB- bought a chunk of Globes business , with yours in it . I 'd call Globe , or drop them an email to their customer service people and ask them why , and make sure you know who owns your policy , so you know who to contact/collect from . It can be very confusing when high finance starts swapping assets , and we little folk try to keep track ... I had a mortgage that was sold 4 times that I know of ! Good luck , I would n't worry too much , just be sure . Thanks for asking !
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company was rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . This company , like every life insurance company , has their niche . Globe Life 's niche is doing policies online and through the mail . While handy , they do not allow people to get as much life insurance as they might want , and going through medical underwriting can save many people money vs buying No Exam coverage online . Whether Globe Life Insurance is good for you depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay .
Per Globe Life 's website , Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Touchmark Corporation , which is a holding company that specializes in life and supplemental health insurance , and has its main office in McKinney , TX . Globe Life 's home office is located in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma .
If you have a Globe Whole Life insurance policy that has accumulated cash value beyond any surrender charges or outstanding loans , you will most likely be able to cash it in . Call Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company at 972-540-6542 with your policy number to talk to a representative and see if you are able to cash in your Globe Life insurance policy .
Do you mean Globe Life ? Globe Life is a life insurance company that offers final expense , accident , and mortgage protection insurance . They are certainly a legitimate insurer that focuses more on middle and working class families to offer them smaller insurance policies to meet financial obligations these people generally do not have the money on hand to meet .
The price of Globe Life Insurance depends on the type of policy you purchase , your age , gender , and other factors . So it is impossible to state a dollar amount for Globe Life Insurance . While the company offers some good rates , their choices for coverage are not too extensive . So you may want to contact Globe to see what rate you can get , then compare it with other companies using the quote engines provided on many websites .
Global Life Insurance is a reference to Globe Life Insurance . Globe is a company that sells life insurance online and through the mail . While popular with those who want smaller policies with little effort , it may not work for those who want larger policies or who want to shop for the lowest price .
Globe Life Insurance , well known for its $ 1 advertisement for the first month 's premium , is an A + rated carrier . As such , they are financially strong . My issue with Globe is in the small print . The level premium increases every 5 years making it virtually impossible for the insured 's to keep a policy at older ages . Most everyone I speak with about Globe was unaware of this important feature . Buyer beware !
As Peggy stated above , if your Globe policy is a whole life policy and has grown some cash value the you should be able to borrow against it . However I would advise you to first find out what the interest rate is and if Globe uses `` direct recognition '' regarding policy loans . Because Globe is a stock company therefore the policy holders do not enjoy the sharing of dividends as with a mutual company . So you may be better off taking a loan from a bank if you ca get a low interest loan . For more on how `` Direct Recognition '' affects a policy loan and why it is imperative that you know their policy before taking a loan , please see the article here : WEBSITELINK
Globe life insurance markets term life insurance , whole life insurance , accidental death insurance , mortgage protection plans , and medicare supplements . Two versions of the whole life policies do build up cash value that you can borrow against . The Children 's whole life policy is called `` The Young American Plan '' and there is a Whole Life policy that adults can purchase . The face amounts of Globe policies are pretty low so if you are looking for policies to accumulate cash , there are better options available .
Globe life insurance is an A + rated life insurance company that has been around since 1951 . Globe offers term insurance , whole life insurance and children 's insurance . They have a deal where you pay $ 1 for the first month and then your premium is based on your age at the time of issue .
That is an excellent question , and one that took some work to find for you ! The initials CMFG stand for CUNA Mutual Financial Group , according to the very nice operator I spoke with . CMFG is the parent company of CUNA , which is the parent company of Globe Life , where your policy was written . Globe will still pay you out when your claim is filed , but your monthly check is going to the parent company 's bank account . While things normally will roll downhill , apparently their premium payments roll uphill first ! I hope that sets your mind at ease , they seem like a solid company , and if they are all as good as that operator was , you 're in good hands . Have an awesome day , and thank you for asking !
Per their website , you can borrow money from a Globe Life Insurance policy . The policy must be Whole Life that you have had long enough to build up a cash value . You can take out a policy loan to borrow against the cash value that has built up in your Globe Whole Life policy .
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company began in 1951 in Oklahoma City Oklahoma and is a subsidiary of Torchmark Corporation . The company has more than 66 billion in force . In 1972 , Globe Life created Employee Services Division to service the Government organizations . It is one of the largest direct to consumer insurance companies in the U.S. .
An insurance carrier is only as good as their rating . Globe Life in my opinion is a quality carrier for three reasons : 1 -RRB- over 50 years old 2 -RRB- A + credit rating 3 -RRB- Over $ 60 bil of life insurance in force The bottom-line is people buy it and have been buying it for a long time . They have to be doing something right to keep satisfied clients paying their premiums . For free real-time life insurance quotes through Globe and other carriers please visit : www.clminsure.com or call me directly at 561-320-2978
If your Globe Life Insurance policy has net cash value after subtracting surrender charges and fees , you could cash it in just as you can any other Whole Life policy . Before doing so , you should talk to a Globe agent to see what other options your policy has , and to make sure you are making the correct choice in cashing it in .
If your Globe Life Insurance policy is Whole Life , as many are , you should be able to borrow money from it . You will need to wait until you have paid in long enough to have money built up in the policy to borrow from . Calling Globe and asking for a current illustration should be able to show you how much there is for you to borrow .
I do not know , however , companies occasionally voluntarily sell blocks of business to other companies . That could be the reason . CUNA Mutual Life insurance company might have bought some policies from Globe . Another possibility is that your state insurance commissioner could have directed the sale of some or all of the Globe business in your state for one of several reasons . It would be good for you to determine who is actually responsible to pay the death benefit . Your agent should be able to help you but a call to the help desk at either life insurance company should resolve the issue .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Where Does Life Insurance Go On A Tax Return ?
This is a very broad question . If you mean Death Benefit Payments , then they are usually tax free . If you are supposed to be taxed , then the Insurance Company will send you a 1099 to include with your taxes and regular W2 . If you have not received a 1099 then you should owe no tax . If you have received a 1099 give it to your accountant or enter it into your tax software .
From your question I can not tell if you are asking the question because you own a life insurance policy and you have been sent a DIV B by the insurance company or if you are asking because you inherited the death benefit from a life insruance policy . If you are receiving a DIV B from the insurance company you have probably been paid a dividend by the insurance company that you chose to receive as cash rather thanre-investing the dividend . Life Insurance death benefits are paid under `` contract law '' . Therefore if you receive a settlement from a life insurance benefit as the beneficiary of that policy then the proceeds are not taxable . However , what happens if the proceeds are invested in certificate of deposits at the bank and now the bank is going to send you a 1099B each year-those interest amounts are taxable
If the life insurance policy is a modified endowment contract , loans are taxable . If the life insurance is a non-modified endowment contract and the policy lapses , is surrendered or the policy reaches its maturity dateall policy loans , -LRB- those received and internal -RRB- are ordinary income tax events is the year they occur . Death benefit proceeds generally pass to their designated beneficiarys tax free . There are some business scenarios where death benefit proceeds are subject to the alternative minimum tax as a preference time and could be included as revenue at ordinary income tax rates . There may be estate taxation on the federal and/or state level .
Where does life insurance go on a tax return ? Usually it does n't . Premiums are usually paid with after tax dollars and gains if you have a cash value policy are n't put on a tax return either , unless you 've set up your policy in such a way that would make those gains taxable . Most people for obvious reasons , do n't set their policies up that way .
Medicare Part A is typically $ 0 as long as you met your 40 quarters -LRB- or 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes -LRB- Medicare taxes -RRB- . If you have not met that requirement , the monthly premium is up to $ 426 per month . For 2014 , the premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 . This can change each year and is based on your modified adjusted gross income on your tax return from 2 years prior . You may also face a high-income premium penalty on your Part B coverage . The $ 104.90 premium is for those with incomes of $ 85,000 or less , if filing an individual tax return , and $ 170,000 , if filing a joint tax return . If your income was between $ 85,000 and $ 107,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 170,000 and $ 214,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 146.90 . If your income was between $ 107,000 and $ 160,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 214,000 and $ 320,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 209.80 . If your income was between $ 160,000 and $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 320,000 and $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 272.70 . If your income was above $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 335.70 . You can encounter other expenses as well such as the Part A and Part B deductibles and late enrollment penalties for not enrolling in Part B when you were first eligible for Medicare . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You 're generally responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can greatly help establish a predictable expense structure - essential for individuals on a fixed income in retirement . It will limit the amount of cost you 're susceptible to in the event of an illness or injury .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
Where does life insurance go on a tax return ? Usually it does n't . Premiums are usually paid with after tax dollars and gains if you have a cash value policy are n't put on a tax return either , unless you 've set up your policy in such a way that would make those gains taxable . Most people for obvious reasons , do n't set their policies up that way .
No . Term insurance is exactly what its name implies , you a buying protection -LRB- some might say renting it -RRB- against the possibility of death occurring during a specified period of time . Term Life Insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance because of its defined duration and because it does not contain any cash build up provisions . Some life insurance companies `` enhance '' their term life products with an option called `` Return of Premium '' but the policyholder pays extra premium above and beyond the cost of the basic term life insurance policy for this privilege . Essentially you are loaning the insurance company your money interest free for them to invest for 10 , 20 or 30 years while simply returning the original money you paid in at the end of the policy 's term . I wo n't argue whether this is a good or a bad investment of money , many people are lousy savers so this approach would give them some money at some future date . However , if you look at the price difference between a pure term life policy and a term life policy with the same death benefit amount and the Return of Premium feature and you invested that difference in a mutual fund or the stock market over the same time frames I suspect the vast majority of people would end up with more money by going down the investment route . You should definitely discuss this with a financial planner or other impartial advisor before making the decision to purchase term life insurance with or without the return of premium option . As an insurance sales person , I definitely believe in the value of life insurance , both term and permanent . But the commissions earned are higher when we sell you a term life policy with the return of premium provision simply because the premiums are higher . If your agent does n't at least touch on these issues with you , perhaps you should visit with another life insurance agent .
1 -RRB- If by guaranteed life insurance you are referring to guaranteed issue life Insurance , that is coverage that can not be declined for health reasons . The policies usually have rather narrow age guidelines , low maximum face amounts , and are graded during the first 1-3 years for death due to natural causes . E.g. . If the insured person died of a heart attack during the first years of the policy , the beneficiary would receive a reduced death benefit -LRB- often return of premium , plus a little extra -RRB- . If death occurs after the graded period ends , the policy pays the full face amount . It usually pays 100 % of the face amount from day one for accidental death . Some guaranteed issue life insurance policy premiums are guaranteed not to go up for life . Some can go up every year , and others are in between -LRB- e.g. can go up every 5 years -RRB- . Keep in mind that you will want to be able to afford this policy in the years ahead , and get lifetime guaranteed level premiums , if possible . Guaranteed issue life insurance can be a good choice for people who can not qualify for any other coverage . Even if death is anticipated within the first two years , the return is better than any savings account . And people are often able to survive serious diseases beyond what is expected . 2 -RRB- If by guaranteed life insurance you mean life insurance where the premium and face amount are guaranteed , it simply means that the premium can not go up , and the face amount can not go down , for a certain period of time . In Term insurance , the guaranteed level period is usually for the term of the policy . In Universal Life , the guaranteed period can be for life , or it can be for a set number of years .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
As a Grantor Trust , the income is reported on the grantor 's individual income tax return , so the Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust does not usually need to file a tax return . If there is no income in the policy , you may need to write an initial note to the IRS stating that . If income is over $ 600/year , you may need to use Form 1041 to file a tax return for that year . Contact your tax consultant to get the final word on this .
Risk and Return possibilities . Or visa versa . What I will do is list my thoughts on Variable life and you can decide if it 's a pro or a con to having a VUL . Requires consistent steady review by insured . Requires rebalancing over time . Requires the insured to make investment choices and live with the results . Requires the insured to have financial knowledge about mutual funds . Requires the insured to have an understanding of financial risk . So depending about how you feel about the requirements as they can be either pro or con , depending on the individual , should determine how you feel about a VUL as a choice . While it is easy to reference `` potential for greater returns '' that does n't say anything about how to get greater returns , those requirements listed put you on track for greater returns , but that said , it does n't guarantee greater returns .
That is my favorite question of the week , hands down ! What an excellent question ! The first place to start is to figure out where your money is going , and eliminate or cut back on those places where it does n't need to go . Maybe you find that you 're dining out 6 nights a week , and that it is a significant amount of your paycheck . Cut back on the number of nights , or go to less expensive places . Put together a budget , and stick to it . Take the money that you now find extra , and use it to create a stable financial foundation for yourself - create an emergency fund , pay down your debt , and start investing the rest . Once you 've created a stable platform to work from , you can be more aggressive with your long range financial plan . It will all start with knowing where your money is going , and how to make it go where you need it to , instead of where it is going now . Be the steward of your money , not its slave . Great question ! Thanks for asking !
The fact that this is your question is significant . I often ask people to take their picture and go to the internet where they can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When they have the picture , ask the picture what they should do for retirement . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement and if you are thirty there is an awfully good chance that you will spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is best regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the minimum required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That was recently . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
Lets begin by defining what is an investment ? In the broadest sense of the word , an investment is when you place money or time into something in expectation of a return on that investment . To that end whole life insurance can serve the purpose of being an investment in that money is invested into it for an expected end . There are a lot of factors that can make an investment bad such as it loses money , it has a low rate of return or it offers no return at all . What makes an investment good or bad is to know what you expect it to return to you . If you want an insurance policy that offers a guaranteed death benefit and has cash value , then a whole life policy may work for you . Define what you want first and then find the vehicle that takes you where you want to go .
If you are referring to Medicare Part B premiums - they are calculated by your IRS tax returns - 2 years prior . So if you retire in 2014 , you would sign up for Medicare A -LRB- if you have n't already -RRB- and Part B . The premium for Part B will be calculated by your 2012 tax return . In 2015 it will be calculated by your 2013 tax return , 2016 by your 2014 tax return and so on . Hope that helps ! Belinda www.myseniorventure.com/answers 805-262-7970
I presume you are asking about the individual mandate requirement of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and the tax penalty associated with not having health insurance or health insurance that meets the requirements of the Affordable Care Act . The term `` levy '' is technically inaccurate as that is an assessment applied to a population in general . Persons without health insurance in 2014 will be subject to a tax penalty when they file their 2014 tax returns in 2015 . The penalty for being uninsured in 2014 will be $ 95 per adult and $ 47.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 285 per household -RRB- or 1 % of their Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- , whichever is greater . The tax penalty for being uninsured in 2015 will increase to $ 325 per adult and $ 162.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 975 per household -RRB- or 2 % of their MAGI , whichever is greater . If you persist in being uninsured in 2016 the tax penalty jumps to $ 695 per adult and $ 347.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 2085 per household -RRB- or 2.5 % of MAGI , whichever is greater . In subsequent years the tax penalty will be adjusted upward by the inflation rate . As the law is currently constructed , the tax penalties described above can only be collected by the IRS from any income tax refund that the taxpayer would have received . The IRS can not bill the taxpayer for the penalty , place a lien on their assets or criminally prosecute the taxpayer . Obviously , this means that an uninsured person 's tax penalty on paper and what their true penalty -LRB- if any -RRB- might be will be directly related to whether they are eligible for a tax refund . So , a person 's ability to structure their tax withholding during the course of the year , or in the case of self-employed persons making estimated tax payments , so that they have little or no refund or owe additional taxes when filing their tax return may largely negate or eliminate the tax penalty for being uninsured .
Term life insurance `` return of premium '' -LRB- ROP -RRB- policies will return all the premiums you paid in if you keep your policy until the term ends . There often is a point about halfway through the policy where the insurance company would return a percentage of premiums paid , if you dropped the policy at that time . This percentage gets higher until the end of the term . Premiums are higher for this type of policy , and if death occurred while the term policy was still in effect , the regular death benefit would be paid . The value to this type of policy is if you outlive the term . The return is tax free and can be a good choice for people who want to get something back from what they paid in .
In Canada , immediate and deferred annuities are , with one exception , taxed on an accrual basis . The growth or income is taxed as earned , not as received . How the income is taxed , depends , if it is interest income or , in the case of Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , interest , dividends or capital gains . Prescribed Annuities enjoy special taxation -LRB- Section 304 of Income Tax Act -RRB- . They are taxed on a straight line basis rather than on an accrual basis . If you qualify for a prescribed annuity then total amount of `` expected '' interest is averaged based on the number of payments . For example invest in a prescribed life income annuity and your `` life expectancy '' is 22 years . The amount of investment DIVIDED BY `` life expectancy '' EQUALS return of your principle and it is not taxed . The annuity payment SUBTRACT the return of your principle is taxable . The tax savings can be substantial , which is why prescribed annuities are often used to increase after tax income . Especially for those who prefer guaranteed interest income . A life insurance policy can replace the capital for your estate . Depending on the the individual circumstances , increases of after tax income can be 50 % or more . Implementing a strategy involving payout annuities is sometimes complicated , it is however , always permanent . Search for Retirement / Financial planner in your area . Then look for an experienced life insurance broker with a professional designation such as a CLU or CFP . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please contact me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Coverage Length Mean In A Life Insurance Policy ?
The coverage length on a life insurance policy has a bit of a different meaning based on the type of policy . On term life policies the length of coverage refers to the time period that the premiums are level and guaranteed not to increase . For example a 20 year level term 's coverage length is 20 years at a set premium . After the 20 years , the premiums will increase exponentially . The coverage length on a cash value policy is the time period when the policy endows . For example the cash value meets the face amount at a predetermined age the policy endows . The endowment will change if any loans are ever taken against the policy .
Coverage length means the length of time that your life insurance policy will stay in effect . Usually , the coverage length is referring to how long the policy will stay in effect at a level premium -LRB- level meaning the premium is guaranteed not to go up -RRB- . The coverage length assumes that payments are made on time and if a policy loan is taken , that it is repaid per policy guidelines .
Coverage length means the length of time that your life insurance policy will stay in effect . Usually , the coverage length is referring to how long the policy will stay in effect at a level premium -LRB- level meaning the premium is guaranteed not to go up -RRB- . The coverage length assumes that payments are made on time and if a policy loan is taken , that it is repaid per policy guidelines .
The coverage length on a life insurance policy has a bit of a different meaning based on the type of policy . On term life policies the length of coverage refers to the time period that the premiums are level and guaranteed not to increase . For example a 20 year level term 's coverage length is 20 years at a set premium . After the 20 years , the premiums will increase exponentially . The coverage length on a cash value policy is the time period when the policy endows . For example the cash value meets the face amount at a predetermined age the policy endows . The endowment will change if any loans are ever taken against the policy .
This is more commonly known as a survivorship universal life -LRB- SUL -RRB- insurance policy - it 's different from an individual universal life insurance policy in that the policy insures the lives of two people -LRB- usually a husband and wife -RRB- . The policy proceeds are only paid out upon the death of the second insured . Many people use this type of policy for estate planning purposes . If your mother can not continue to make premium payments or does not want to , she can surrender the policy and take out the cash value -LRB- less any surrender charges , outstanding loans , or interest , if applicable -RRB- . There is also the option to let it run out on it 's own . When you no longer contribute premiums to the policy , it will steadily use up the cash value in the policy to continue the coverage until there is nothing left , at which the point the policy would `` crash '' on it 's own and no longer provide coverage . The third option is to change the structure of the policy . You may have the option to reduce the face amount of the policy -LRB- the death benefit -RRB- or reduce the length of coverage to lower the premiums to make the policy more affordable if cost is a concern . I would suggest your mother contact the agent on the policy and ask them to run midstreams to find out what the current values are on the policy , how long the coverage will go for on the guaranteed side and current assumption side of the program and what changes would it make to the policy given the above options . This will provide a good indication as to what course of action would be most appropriate . Guaranteed side means how long will the coverage be guaranteed for at the absolute minimum with a given program structure . Current assumption side means how long will the coverage go for given today 's values .
Life Insurance term length means the number of years that the policy will stay in effect . Usually , the term length is also an indication of how long the policy premium will stay the same price . But some policies guarantee the premium to stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for only part of the term . E.g. . A 20 year Term policy has term length of 20 years . It may or may not be guaranteed not to go up in price for the full 20 years . When the 20 years are done , the policy will end , or the premium will go way up , usually over 10 times higher than it was before .
Good rates for term life insurance are the lowest rates from a given carrier you can qualify for for the desired face amount and term length of coverage . The premiums for any life insurance policy are determined by the risk classification the carrier will approve you for . The better the risk class you qualify for , the lower your rates will be . The risk classification is dependent upon a number of factors including , but not limited to , your age , gender , height/weight profile , medications you may be taking , medical conditions you may be being treated for , family medical history , and any tobacco usage . Please note , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines so , depending on your medical history , you may qualify for a better risk class with one carrier than another . This is why it 's important to shop the case among a number of carriers to make sure you 're getting the lowest rates for the desired coverage amount and term length - this does not mean apply to many companies -LRB- applying to multiple companies works against you -RRB- . It means review your medical background with an experienced , independent life insurance broker who can shop the case for you to determine which carrier will work best for your medical history and offer you the lowest rates . Insurance brokers do not charge any fees for their input so you can only help yourself by speaking with one . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage , provide quotes , and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! And oh , no , they are definitely not the same . In fact , they are really at exact opposites of the life insurance spectrum . Term policies are very inexpensive , are very simple , and explain exactly what is paid and when . The cost and length of the policy are defined , and unchangeable . Universal life policies are exactly the opposite . The length of the policy is described as whole life , but can end if conditions of performance are n't met . The price you pay for the policy can also vary , as can the benefit to be paid , again based upon the performance of the policy . This policy requires that you pay attention to it 's performance , to ensure that it does what you want it to do , while a term policy runs on auto-pilot . If you want more information , please inbox me , ok ? I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Term length in life insurance means the number of years that the policy will stay in effect at the same premium . E.g. . A 10 year Term policy will stay at the same price for 10 years ; a 30 year Term policy is assumed to stay at the same price for 30 years . However , some policies will guarantee that the premium stays the same for part of the term and does not guarantee that it will stay the same for the remainder of the term . It is important to make sure that your premium is guaranteed not to go up for the entire term , whether that be 10 , 20 , 30 years or some other term length .
Paid up value in life insurance is a non-forfeiture provision which is found in most classic whole life insurance policies . Non-forfeitureprovisions are a series of values found within a life policy that give you options if you want to stop making premium payments on your policy . These options are : Cash Surrender : Giving up or selling your policy back to the insurance company for the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy over the years you own it . These values are stated on a chart called Non-forfeiture Provisions contained within your policy . Extended Term Insurance : This provides for the continuation of the full face amount of your policy for a specified period of time based on the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy . The length of time is stated in the same chart listed as non-forfeiture provisions . Paid-up Insurance Value : This provision also is included the the chart of Non-forfeiture provisions and it lists the new face amount of insurance you can elect if you stop making premium payments for the policy . It is based on the cash surrender value of the policy at the time you stop making premium payments . Depending on the length of time the policy is in force this amount may equal the full face amount of the policy , and this amount will be in force for the rest of your life . There are policies that can be purchased with a date where the policy is fully paid up , such as a 20 year payment life , or a life paid up at age 65 . Generally these policies spread a lifetime of premium payments over a shorter period of time making the premium payments slightly more than a traditional whole life policy where premium payments are paid for the life of the insured , and are typically known as a limited payment life policy .
When you first purchased your term life insurance policy , one of the options you designated was the term length -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- in which the premium would remain locked in place for and could not increase . At the end of the designated term length premium guarantee period , the policy will do one of two things : 1 -RRB- the premiums will begin to increase each year by a substantial margin -LRB- based on age -RRB- 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same , but the death benefit will rapidly decrease -LRB- this method is only used on some term policies that are issued on a universal life chassis -RRB- What you will commonly see is the first method . For example , if you purchased a 20 year term policy and outlive the 20 year period , the premiums will start increasing in year 21 . Since the premiums will keep going up and up , most people replace the term policy with a new life insurance policy -LRB- term or permanent - depending on need and age -RRB- to create a new premium guarantee period . Note - the new policy will feature a higher rate structure -LRB- for the same coverage structure -RRB- as your older and due to any changes in health history - to accommodate this , you can adjust the face amount or length of coverage to reduce the premium of the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
Term length is the number of years that the policy will stay in-force at the same premium . Typical term lengths are 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years . Some companies will allow a different or even a longer term length . Some policies allow you to continue coverage past the end of the term , but the premiums increase to a much higher amount .
That is a great question ! Universal life policies are not like other life insurance policies . A term policy has clearly defined time periods of coverage and payment amounts and frequency . A whole life policy has a set payment , and a certain end date -LRB- yours -RRB- . A universal , or variable , policy is not so clearly defined , and therefore is not the best policy for some people . In this type of policy , your payments , and length of coverage are dependent upon investment performance , and if the investments do poorly , the policy alters to adjust . That means your payments may increase dramatically , your coverage shorten , or your policy collapses and goes belly up . Your policy may make guarantees about these things , you will need to check with your agent and see . Good luck . Thanks for asking !
AARP does not offer any life insurance - they are only a marketing organization . They associate themselves with certain insurers and allow the carriers to attach their name to a product . For example , life insurance is typically done through New York Life while Medicare Supplement insurance is typically done through United Healthcare . One of my family members who is an AARP member gets letters in the mail frequently for life insurance with the AARP name -LRB- insurance through New York Life -RRB- . However , the coverage is age-banded and only carries the policy through age 80 - the coverage then terminates if they live beyond age 80 with no option to extend the program . Age-banded coverage means the rates change every 5 years as you enter into the next age bracket . They may have other life insurance products available with their name on attached , but that 's what constantly comes in the mail . If you 're looking for term life insurance , I would highly highly highly suggest consulting with an independent agent who can compare multiple carriers for you and discuss your medical history to determine the risk classification each carrier may consider you for -LRB- the risk class directly determines the premiums -RRB- . Shopping before applying is vital ! And there 's no cost to using an independent agent vs. going through a carrier directly . I would n't just buy on name as there are numerous carriers that offer term insurance who offer competitive rates . You can end up spending extra money that you do n't need to when you do that -LRB- that 's not to say a big name carrier would n't in fact be the best cost option , you just want to be sure you 're not overpaying -RRB- . The risk class is key to figure out first and then look at the rates for a given coverage amount/term length from there . If you do n't know what risk class you would likely fall under for a carrier , then a quote is nothing more than a guesstimate . Term life insurance is very straightforward . If you die during the life of the policy , the carrier pays out the death benefit proceeds . If you outlive the term premium guarantee period and and do n't want to pay the annual renewable term rates -LRB- which go up each year as you get older -RRB- , then you would likely either replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy or not have any coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The maximum amount of coverage carriers generally approve for a stay-at-home spouse -LRB- or even if they 're just temporarily unemployed -RRB- is going to be up to the face amount the working spouse has in place , regardless of whether it 's term or permanent coverage . A good way to figure out how much coverage is appropriate for a non-working spouse is what expenses would be incurred you need is what expenses would be incurred if the stay-at-home spouse passed away . This can be a wide range of things including the cost of daycare -LRB- if you have kids -RRB- , what it would cost to hire someone to do the services the stay-at-home spouse did during the day , funeral expenses , etc. . From there , you 'll want to look at how long do you need that coverage for ? Til the kids are out of the house ? til the house is paid off ? til you 're retired ? longer ? Perhaps you need a higher amount of coverage now and less coverage later . Many people often have a hard time finding the right balance point of amount of coverage and length of coverage . This is where working with an independent insurance agent can come in handy in helping you determine what insurance policy structure will be most suitable to cover the needs at hand . Send me a message if I can be of help .
I believe what you 're referring to is flexible premium adjustable life insurance -LRB- commonly referred to as Universal life insurance -RRB- - this is a type of permanent life insurance . Under these types of programs , the policyowner has the ability to change the amount they 're paying each month , manipulate the length of coverage under the policy , alter the policy face amount , all the while being able to build cash value . One of the most popular universal life policies is Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- . In a GUL policy , you 're not placing the emphasis of the coverage on the cash value the policy builds , but rather the death benefit by maximizing the value of your premium -LRB- paying the lowest possible cost for a given amount of coverage -RRB- . A good way of thinking of it is like taking the term guarantee period and bringing it out for life - so it 's got the essence of both term and whole life coverage in it . Under a GUL program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker to help you determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs . We can shop the case if you 've got a complex medical history -LRB- identifying the risk class you qualify for a very important step when buying life insurance because it determines what you pay for the coverage -RRB- , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance costs can range from $ 10/month for a small policy on a child , to almost no limit on a huge business policy . Not only does the amount of the policy and age of the applicant figure in the cost , but the type of life insurance you purchase does , as well . A very short term policy will usually cost far less than a 30 year Term or Permanent policy . But if you look at the big picture , buying one long policy may cost less than buying several short ones . To see what the different lengths of policies cost for you , visit a website that offers free , instant quotes . Then call to talk to an agent personally so that you are placed with a policy that has the best prices for your age and health .
You coverage length options for long term disability depend on the carrier but are some combination of the following : 2 years , 5 years , 10 years , to age 65 , to age 67 and/or to age 70 . There is also an elimination period that must be satisfied in order for the policy to kick it . Typical elimination periods are : 30 days , 60 days , 90 days , 180 days and/or 365 days . From my experience , the most common is a 90 day elimination period with coverage to age 65/67 . It is also important to note that the length of coverage of an own occupation definition of disability could be shorter than the total coverage of the policy . This is most common in group long term disability insurance .
When buying Term Life Insurance , it is a good idea to match the length of the term with life events . E.g. Becoming a parent . Losing your income could cause great hardship to your children , until the age when they are earning their own living . So 20-30 year Term is recommended . Yes , you could get 10 year Term and then buy a new policy when the first one expires . But what if you develop a serious illness in the next 10 years , are charged higher premiums , have medical bills piled up , maybe even had to go on disability , and ca n't afford the new policy ? Sounds far fetched , but that is honestly a more probable scenario than your passing away in the next 10 years . Matching the length of your Term policy to your need -LRB- based on life events -RRB- can save you a lot of money in the long run .
end question
start question
annuities
Is Annuity Income Taxed ?
Yes , annuity income is taxed . The growth inside the annuity is tax deferred during the accumulation phase , but when you start the annuitization or distribution phase , where you start collecting payments , you will need to start paying income taxes on them . If you receive the payment as a lump sum , you will pay taxes on the difference between what you paid in and what you were paid . Not only can annuities be a good source of retirement income , but most people are in a lower tax bracket when they retire , so that the taxes do not sting as much .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In Canada , immediate and deferred annuities are , with one exception , taxed on an accrual basis . The growth or income is taxed as earned , not as received . How the income is taxed , depends , if it is interest income or , in the case of Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , interest , dividends or capital gains . Prescribed Annuities enjoy special taxation -LRB- Section 304 of Income Tax Act -RRB- . They are taxed on a straight line basis rather than on an accrual basis . If you qualify for a prescribed annuity then total amount of `` expected '' interest is averaged based on the number of payments . For example invest in a prescribed life income annuity and your `` life expectancy '' is 22 years . The amount of investment DIVIDED BY `` life expectancy '' EQUALS return of your principle and it is not taxed . The annuity payment SUBTRACT the return of your principle is taxable . The tax savings can be substantial , which is why prescribed annuities are often used to increase after tax income . Especially for those who prefer guaranteed interest income . A life insurance policy can replace the capital for your estate . Depending on the the individual circumstances , increases of after tax income can be 50 % or more . Implementing a strategy involving payout annuities is sometimes complicated , it is however , always permanent . Search for Retirement / Financial planner in your area . Then look for an experienced life insurance broker with a professional designation such as a CLU or CFP . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please contact me .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Variable Annuities are taxed just the same as a traditional Fixed Annuity . If the Annuity is not in an IRA or other Qualified Plan , then any withdrawal is subject to capitol gains tax , both Federal and State . This is just on the `` Gains '' of the policy . If the Annuity is in an IRA or Qualified Retirement Plan , then withdrawals are taxed as Income . It is also important to note that any withdrawal before age 591/2 , is subject to a 10 % tax penalty . This is for IRA & non IRA Annuities . If the Annuity is a Variable Immediate Annuity , which pays an income stream to you , then things are a bit different . If it is an IRA then all income payments are taxed as Income . If it is not an IRA , then it is taxed under the exclusion ration . This `` excludes '' a certain percentage of the income from taxes , since it is considered basis -LRB- principle -RRB- .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Annuities are used for retirement as a source of regular income . Your annuity is tax deferred until you take out payments . The contributions you put into an annuity are not taxed , and the earnings are taxed at your tax rate during retirement . Therefore , they can be a tax favorable way of earning supplemental income during retirement . If you take out an immediate annuity , you contribute a lump sum and can begin to take out regular payments nearly immediately . A deferred annuity allows you to make payments into it over a number of years , then annuitize the annuity to receive regular payments . These payments are generally used to add to Social Security benefits and other income during retirement . Variable annuities make your annuity more of an investment , with the risks that come with variable products . Indexed annuities also allow for more growth but protect the original contribution .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
While the answer is - `` YES '' , you can combine annuities - it is important to bear in mind that some annuities have different tax treatment than others . My advice is to only combine annuity money of a similar nature with that of another . For example , an IRA -LRB- individual Retirement Account -RRB- provides a deduction on the IRS 1040 against income . Because of this feature and tax benefit , all money coming out of an IRA , both interest and basis , are taxed as income upon distribution . In other words , because of the tax deduction , distributions from an IRA are taxed as if all the money coming from the account is being taxed for the first time . An ordinary tax qualified annuity , a non-IRA annuity , incurs taxation only on the gain at the time of distribution . This exclusion formula recognizes that some of the money deposited was already taxed as ordinary income when you first earned it and this money will not be taxed again at distribution . That is why I suggest honoring the character of the money and keeping IRA 's with IRA 's , etc. . This simple rule of thumb will help relieve you of explaining years later the source or the money and help you argue successfully that some money should not be taxed . Who among us will remember 30-40 years hence how these accounts were merged ? There are a whole other set of rules for conversions and methods to avoid taxation prior to annuitization and the beginning of the payout period of your annuities . This answer covers general theory only on the idea you want to minimize taxation to the largest extent possible .
The health insurance premium tax credit is a creation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and first became available January 1 , 2014 . In general , individuals and families whose income falls between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level will qualify for some level of subsidy for health insurance that they purchase through the Federal or state health insurance marketplaces in the person 's state of residence . The amount of premium credit a person qualifies for is based upon a sliding scale that is highest at the low end of the Federal Poverty Level and declines to almost nothing as a person gets to the 400 % level . A person can only receive this premium tax credit for health insurance plans they purchase through the government health insurance marketplace . You do have a choice when you learn that you qualify for a premium tax credit . You can choose to receive it in the form of an `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' or you can wait until you do your annual taxes and capture it at that time . With the `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' choice your credit amount will be sent to the insurance carrier you select each month to pay a portion of your monthly premium and you will be balance billed for the rest . If you opt to pay for your health insurance in full and then claim your credit on your income taxes the amount of the credit you qualified for would be included in any income tax refund you receive . This might be a very important choice . Your premium subsidy will be based upon what you estimate your income will be in the coming year . If you guess wrong and receive a higher subsidy than it turns out you actually qualified for based on the income you report on your income tax form for that year then the overpayment can be withheld from any income tax refund you might have had coming . Conversely , if you made less than you had projected you would find your possible income tax refund increased by the remaining subsidy amount you would have qualified for . While the premium tax subsidies do provide a mechanism to assist persons in certain income levels to purchase health insurance they might not have otherwise been able to afford , it will also complicate the income tax filing process for many of these people .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is A Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan ?
The most common understanding of a supplemental executive retirement plan is one contributes to a permanent cash value plan : Participating Whole Life , Current Assumption Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Variable Universal Life . Product suitability needs to match up to the policy owners financial profile and risk tolerance . The policy design is critical to the cash accumulation , using the lowest cost of insurance option that complies with TAMRA . The most popular supplemental plan is a 162 Executive Bonus Arrangement .
The most common understanding of a supplemental executive retirement plan is one contributes to a permanent cash value plan : Participating Whole Life , Current Assumption Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Variable Universal Life . Product suitability needs to match up to the policy owners financial profile and risk tolerance . The policy design is critical to the cash accumulation , using the lowest cost of insurance option that complies with TAMRA . The most popular supplemental plan is a 162 Executive Bonus Arrangement .
Cash value life insurance products are frequently used as a retirement planning vehicle . Most nonqualified retirement plans , from the largest to the smallest companies in America , use life insurance to informally fund the retirement payments companies make to their retiring executives . So , it would stand to reason that what works for those arrangements can work for individuals , too ! With the right products , an experienced life insurance professional can design a supplemental retirement plan using life insurance to provide income in retirement , tax free -LRB- through policy loans -RRB- . Whole life is not always the best choice in terms of efficiency and flexibility . Universal life based products are better , in my experience .
Bank owned life insurance -LRB- BOLI -RRB- allows banks to obtain better after tax return on assets than tier 1 capital . The bank is owner and beneficiary of the life insurance , not bank executives . Regulations have tightened in recent years and banks must have a legitimate reason to own life insurance on the lives of highly compensated executives of the bank . BOLI is usually set up to informally fund nonqualified benefit plans for selected executives . The executive is an insured in these policies but has no ownership interest . The executive 's family not a beneficiary of the policy though the nonqualified benefit agreements may have death benefit provisions which are income taxable to them unlike a life insurance policy death benefit . Though not BOLI , split dollar arrangements have reemerged which can overcome most BOLI shortcomings and allow both the bank and the executive to directly participate in and benefit from a life insurance contract .
A SERP is a Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan generally for key executives in a company . Employers who wish to retain the services of important employees use deferred compensation plans as golden handcuffs to secure their employment into the future . SERPs generally have a vesting schedule over a time certain period described in the arrangement .
Deferred compensation plans are generally an additional executive retirement plan when a qualified plan contributions have reached their maximum . Although the employer ca n't deduct the plan until the employee 's retirement date , the plan generally has a vesting schedule that can be a golden handcuff to the key executive to stay on until it 's fully vested . The plans accumulate tax deferred and are taxable as ordinary income during distributions .
Section 457 plans are nonqualified deferred compensation plans available only to state and local government employers , and nongovernment organizations exempt from tax under IRC Section 501 . Generally 457 plans are utilized for two reasons - 1 . As deferred compensation plans that allow participants to reduce their taxable salary in a manner similar to that of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans generally are not available to state and local government organizations . 2 . As supplemental benefit plans that provide executives with supplemental retirement income .
The simple answer to your question is that insurance premiums ARE NOT a deductible expense for anyone . However , depending upon the use of the insurance , for instance , as part of an Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan -LRB- SERP plans -RRB- , there are tax benefits -LRB- deduction -RRB- to the employer realized when the policy 's cash value is paid out to the employee . Additionally , administrative costs may be tax-deductible as a business expense . Separately , under anexecutive bonus plans where the bonus is paid directly in the form of premium payments to the insurer for policies owned and FBO of the executive , the employer has no ERISA reporting , potentially tax deductible costs and can avert tax rules applicable to Qualified Pans and employer owner line insurance . Please feel free to contact me through my profile if you have additional questions .
This appears to be a simple question ; however , publicly traded corporations have found that by purchasing key person policies on senior executives they can provide lavish payouts when that executive leaves the firm . The idea is simple ; the corporation has an insurable interest in the life of the executive . There are costs of securing a replacement and it the loss of a key employee can affect the companys ability to borrow money . All these factors and many others make these senior executives very valuable . The corporation can insure them to make up the financial impact that their unexpected death would make . By using cash value life insurance they can also accumulate a large amount of cash which will ease the transition when the executive leaves .
Supplemental executive retirement plans normally take the form of non-qualified deferred compensation arrangements . The so-called `` golden handcuffs '' mean the promise to pay comes with a substantial risk of forfeiture . Non-qualified retirement plans do not meet the same criteria as qualified plans . These non-qualified plans may include payouts in company stock or benefits funded by life insurance .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
A supplementae executive retirement plan or SERP is a form of non-qualified deferred compensation . Since the planned is non-qualified , the employer has the ability to select who participate in the plan -LRB- i.e. they can choose to offer such a plan only to a select number of employees and do not have to make the offer to everyone -RRB- . Traditionally the plans are set up as additional retirement benefits to an employee who is highly coveted by the employer . The plans are used as an incentive to keep certain key employees and disuade them from leaving the employer . The retirement benefits offered under the plan are only payable to the employee if he or she stays at the employer for a certain period of time , which can be a rather longer period of time .
Term life insurance is very popular to cover indemnification planning scenarios . Its cheap and does the job . Permanent life insurance for those in high tax brackets is very popular as supplemental retirement income and executive compensation plans . Permanent life insurance also works well for estate planning , charitable giving and making a difference in succeeding family generations .
In scenarios where executive benefits are a recruiting and retention feature of the company , disability insurance can be a significant key person employee perk . The disability insurance premium can be expensed as a legitimate tax deduction to the company . But if benefits are generated to the executive , the income is taxed as oridanry income at the executive 's effective tax bracket .
The simple answer is `` Yes ! '' Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is ethical . However , in recent years , because of some of the abuses , it has become more scrutinized in its uses . There are many valid reasons for using COLI . It could be very important to a company if a key person in their company died . In some cases , it would take months or years to replace that person with a specific skill set ; so COLI maybe purchased to offset the loss . It may also be used as `` golden handcuffs '' , where the life insurance builds cash value for a future date to pay executive retirement beyond a 401k . This can be done formally , through legal documents -LRB- the IRS even identifies it by code number much like `` 401k '' -RRB- . The unethical part came into play when companies purchased life insurance of people where they had no insurable interest -LRB- in other words would not be at risk of significant loss by the death of the person insured under the policy -RRB- . For example , CompanyZ purchased COLI on all of its 22,000 employees - from executives done to the maintenance.When a rank-in-file employee died , Company Z kept the death benefit , giving them a tax free benefit . The courts decided that Company Z did not have an insurable interest and required them to pay the family the death benefit . The policy was clearly determined not to be COLI but to be STOLI -LRB- Stranger Owned Life Insurance -RRB- .
The first place to look is your husbands employer group plan to see if he elected life insurance . It may also be itemized on his pay stub or payroll check receipt . It is possible that his employer purchased life insurance on him as a key executive or part of his executive package separate from the businesses group plan . The next place to look is your checking account for payments that appear to be to an insurance company .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
I tend to agree with Larry . Life Insurance primary intention is to provide a tax-free death benefit to beneficiaries upon death of the insured . You need to understand this part of Life Insurance before looking at all the benefits provided . Life Insurance can provide supplemental income to meet any need if funded correctly . Life Insurance is one of the only vehicles that can provide tax-free income , a tax-free death benefit ! Life Insurance is used by businesses for buy-sell situations , key employee needs , executive retirement plans , etc. . When the Life Insurance is funded correctly , which by the way , it is my experience that most agents do not do , it will become a true asset designed to meet your future needs .
Contact ING and request documents to execute to withdraw money from a retirement plan . It depends if it is an IRA or 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and if you are over 591/2 or not . If you want to withdraw funds from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan you can only withdraw money that you put it or is vested in a company plan . If you take the money out before you reach retirement age you will pay a penalty of , I believe , 10 % and have to pay taxes on the income . You may be better served to take a loan out if it is permitted .
In most cases the disability premium is not being deducted as a business expense , so the benefits that are generated by the policy to the claimant are tax free . However , in some business scenarios , disability insurance is expensed as an executive benefit . Then policy benefits are taxed as ordinary income at the effective tax bracket rate -LRB- in this case -RRB- of the executive .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What 's A Deductible For Car Insurance ?
A deductible , regardless of the type of coverage you have , is the amount you pay in the event that you need to file a claim with your insurance company for a covered loss . A deductible choice has a direct effect on the price that you pay for the coverage in that the higher the deductible -LRB- meaning the amount of risk that you are willing to accept for yourself -RRB- the lower the premium you will be charged for the insurance coverage .
A deductible on car insurance can apply to either collision or comprehensive coverage . It represents the amount that you are responsible for when a claim is filed . For example , if an at-fault accident causes $ 4500 of damages , and your deductible is $ 250 , the insurer would pay $ 4,250 and your portion would be $ 250 . A fairly simple concept is n't it ?
A deductible by definitionis the amount you must pay before benefits `` kick in '' and begin paying.The deductible amount can vary by policy . For example , if you have a $ 500 deductible and want to make a claim , you must pay the $ 500 before the insurance carrier pays it 's share of expenses related to the claim .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
Something to consider when choosing a deductible is to ask yourself , what are you comfortable with paying if there is a loss vs. what you save . Here is a generic example . Say for example you want a $ 500.00 collision deductible for your car . Now you may be considering a $ 1000.00 deductible to save you a little money . And for example going to a $ 1000.00 deductible vs. a $ 500.00 deductible will save you $ 50.00 every six months . That is $ 100.00 in your pocket annually . It would take you 5 years to break even vs. what you save and what you could potentially pay out and then you are money ahead . This is one good way to weigh the options of what deductible to take and help you make an intelligent decision .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
I am assuming this question relates to whether or not a policyholder can deduct their auto insurance premiums on their Federal or state income taxes . Unless the car is used for business purposes , the answer is `` no '' . However , if you use your car for business purposes , and your employer does not reimburse you for the business use of your car , there is a way to deduct a portion of your auto insurance premium . The IRS allows two ways to deduct expenses for the non-reimbursed use of your personal car . The first method is the mileage method . The IRS sets a mileage allowance every year , and that allowance is meant to cover fuel , wear and tear , maintenance , insurance , and other expenses . The second method is to keep track of all of the expenses related to your car , and then pro-rate those expenses by the amount of business use of your car . My employer reimburses me for the business use of my car using the mileage method . I do n't know if it 's worth the trouble to keep detailed records of your car expenses to make the second method worthwhile .
That 's a great question ! The answer will depend upon what you are using the car for . If it is your family car , and the family insurance policy , sorry , but probably not . If you are using it for both family and work , then you want to get a tax attorney or tax professional 's opinion . You may be able to deduct a portion . If It 's a business car , with a business policy , then most likely yes , you can . Two things to remember : Always consult a tax expert when deciding what to claim as a deduction ; and if you are using the family car for business , and have it marked in some way to advertise or designate your business and get into an accident , you may get a nasty surprise when you file the claim . Many insurance companies will tell you that since the car was being used in a business capacity , it is not insured unless covered by a business policy and deny your claim . If you would like more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
If you 're auto insurance is just too expensive for you to afford , there are some things you can do to help ease that burden . You may not like some of my advice , but it 's the right advice . A very large part of your insurance premium is the physical damage to the car itself . Raising deductibles will lower your premiums somewhat . Ask yourself if you really need to cover the physical damage at all . If it 's an older car and you own it outright , this could be an option . Before you do this , however , understand that , if your car is damaged , the insurance company will not pay to fix it . One thing not to do is to lower your bodily injury liability limits . You wo n't save very much and you 'll be putting everything you own at risk , including your income . Here 's the advice you may not like : Perhaps you have too nice a car for your budget . If that 's the case , get a less expensive car . Then , when your finances -LRB- or your driving record -RRB- allow , you can always get a nicer car . Talk to an agent you can trust . They can give you advice on these questions as well as others . It also helps if you check rates on a car before you buy it . Everyone loves getting a new car . You just do n't want an unpleasant surprise when your insurance bill comes .
With most insurance policies you have a deductible and car insurance is no exception . The way the deductible works is you would receive payment for the damages less your deductible . You do not have to pay thedeductible to theinsurance company . For example , if you ran into the back of someone and the damage to your car was $ 2,500 you would receive a check -LRB- or the repair shop -RRB- for $ 2,500 - deductible . You would then pay the repair shop the difference . A Standard deductible for car insurance is $ 500 but some people choose a lower deductible for comprehensive coveragewhich covers , cracked windshields and other damages not attributed to a collision accident .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Find Out What Life Insurance Someone Has ?
I feel like the poster child for this question with my father recently passing away at age 84 with 5 small , obscure , life insurance policies for which my mom just got paid . One was taken out when he was 16 years old from a company that we never heard of . I entered the name of the original company in a search engine and quickly found the name of the company now in charge of the policy . Our funeral director tracked it down . If you have the name of the company , you will find the money . If you do not have the policy number or do not know whether the deceased person even had life insurance , you can start by digging in their records and talking to relatives to see if the deceased person mentioned any to them . I have had calls from people who found my email on their relatives ' computers , asking if their loved ones had responded to the quotes I had given them . If all fails , life insurance that goes unclaimed can end up in the files of the state where it was purchased , after a few years . Check out this website for more information : WEBSITELINK
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Find a good local experienced independent agent in your area who can sit down with you , discuss your needs and goals and help you find the plan that is affordable for you . Do not bow to high pressure sales tactics . Find someone you are comfortable with . You may want to interview a few agents before deciding on the one you want to do business with . A good agent will be looking out for YOUR interests . Find someone who has been in the business for a while , who knows the plans and options available to you .
Even if someone has car insurance , if you choose to sue them you have to file in small claims court unless this is a much larger claim . I would reach out to an attorney to get more details . When someone has insurance , usually that company will give you a settlement however sometimes what they offer is not what you can get or should be awarded which you end up in court anyway . There are some great attorneys that specialize in accidents . I do not know what state you are in so I can not make a recommendation but just do some homework . Get someone that is reputable . Good Luck .
You really should n't start out by deciding how much to pay . You should start out by deciding what kind and how much . You may find that you need some term and some whole-life . Once you determine that find out what the price is for what you need . If it 's too much , buy the term only but make certain that it 's convertible to whole-life later .
A life insurance policy could be denied for any of the following reasons : 1 -RRB- The applicant 's health was not controlled . This can be anything from someone with diabetes having an A1C over 10 , to someone with cancer having only months to live . 2 -RRB- The applicant 's health has not been stable for a certain length of time . This can range from someone who had very high blood pressure and only been on medication for one month , to someone with MS who has had a recent major exacerbation . 3 -RRB- The applicant is planning to have major medical testing or procedure done in the near future . In other words , if your doctor has scheduled a test to see if you have Parkinson 's , you will need to wait until after the test to apply . If you have gastric bypass surgery scheduled in two months , the insurance company will ask that you wait until after your surgery to apply . 4 -RRB- The applicant has had a recent bankruptcy that has not been discharged , has undergone recent drug or alcohol treatment , has had numerous traffic violations in the past year , or other non-health related risk factors . The above mostly relate to medically underwritten policies . There are simplified issue policies -LRB- that do not require an exam -RRB- and guaranteed issued policies -LRB- that do not have any requirements -RRB- that can be obtained when a medically underwritten policy will not work . Simplified and guaranteed issue policies do have restrictions on face amounts , you must be in a certain age range to get them , and they are not available in every state . Thus , some people do apply for simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies and get declined simply because they do not fit the age , or it is not offered in their state . This is most common for persons applying by mail or online . If you enlist the help of a good agent , you can avoid many declines by having proper guidance in the first place .
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
The maximum amount of coverage carriers generally approve for a stay-at-home spouse -LRB- or even if they 're just temporarily unemployed -RRB- is going to be up to the face amount the working spouse has in place , regardless of whether it 's term or permanent coverage . A good way to figure out how much coverage is appropriate for a non-working spouse is what expenses would be incurred you need is what expenses would be incurred if the stay-at-home spouse passed away . This can be a wide range of things including the cost of daycare -LRB- if you have kids -RRB- , what it would cost to hire someone to do the services the stay-at-home spouse did during the day , funeral expenses , etc. . From there , you 'll want to look at how long do you need that coverage for ? Til the kids are out of the house ? til the house is paid off ? til you 're retired ? longer ? Perhaps you need a higher amount of coverage now and less coverage later . Many people often have a hard time finding the right balance point of amount of coverage and length of coverage . This is where working with an independent insurance agent can come in handy in helping you determine what insurance policy structure will be most suitable to cover the needs at hand . Send me a message if I can be of help .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 9497972424 .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Here are a few tips to help you buy the best life insurance . 1 -RRB- Contact a reputable agent for advice . Whether face to face or online , conversing with someone who knows what they are doing can safe you lots of time , hundreds of dollars , and most importantly , help you get a secure policy that best suits your needs . 2 -RRB- Learn about life insurance , but do n't be narrow minded . Sometimes health factors , age , state availability , cost , etc. can keep you from getting the exact policy you want . Occasionally someone tells me that they are going to keep shopping until they find the policy in their head . What happens is , those people never get life insurance , or they end up getting Accidental Death coverage that covers only a small percentage of deaths . There are policies out there for almost everyone , and something is almost always better than nothing . But it helps to know what to ask , then accept the answer when your agent has obviously done his/her homework to find it for you . 3 -RRB- Look at carrier ratings and policy guarantees . Those three tips are all you need to get you the best life insurance .
Maybe ! Universal life policies are curious things ... If it has any cash value you can surrender it and `` cash it out '' . Whether it has any cash value will depend on how long you 've had it and how well you 've funded it - that is how much you 've paid into it . If you 've had the policy for a long time and never increased the premium payments there may not be any cash value left . Request an in force illustration from the issuing company to find out what if any surrender value it has .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
To find good life insurance , find a good broker . He or she will help you determine what is good for you . What amount ... what cost ... what carrier are good for you ? A good broker will help you find out - and find this all out before you apply , so you can be confident of the outcome of underwriting . Good life insurance is a policy you are glad to buy .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Homeowners insurance is important part of helping to protect yours ' and your family financial futures . A home is a huge investment without homeowners insurance how will you rebuild after a fire or tornado . How will your protect your assets if someone is hurt on your property if you do n't have homeowners insurance ? This is just a couple of the coverages that are provided by homeowners insurance . To find out more about what a homeowners insurance policy has to offer contact your local agent .
Someone can take a life insurance policy out on you if : 1 -RRB- you have an insurable interest in their life , and 2 -RRB- you consent to having the policy placed . An insurable interest means that they would be harmed financially if you passed away because you provide for them in some way . People ca n't just pick out someone to insure and try to make a profit off of their death . Consenting to the policy means signing the application , agreeing to have your medical records reviewed if required , doing an exam or phone interview if ordered . Often when someone is taking out a policy on another , they will choose a No Exam policy . But that is totally up to the person being insured and the person taking out the policy , who is usually the policy owner .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Long Term Disability Insurance Worth The Cost ?
Every product purchase has a value proposition to assess . Disability insurance is no exception . Disability insurance is paycheck protection . Most American workers have 90 days in cash reserves . The odds are you will be disabled once in your working career . Depending upon your age , gender , smoking status , health history , etc. , is 3 to 5 % of your compensation worth it ?
As with all types of insurance , you are taking a chance that you will have paid into the policy for years and never used it . However , Long Term Disabilities occur much more often than people think , even to younger workers . Nearly half of all bankruptcies are due to becoming disabled and the resultant loss/cut in income . When you look at the financial consequences of becoming disabled , Long Term Disability Insurance is worth the cost for people who can squeeze it into their budget .
As with all insurance , you make the decision to self insurance and retain all the risk or you pass the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a premium . Whether or not long term disability insurance depends on what would happen to you financial situation if you became disabled . When cost is a concern , my recommendation is to insure against the catastrophic , that is a longer waiting period with a higher benefit . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Long term care insurance is not worth the cost if it causes you to cut back on groceries or medication or other essentials needed for a healthy and happy life . If you have very little savings , assets or investments , long term care insurance may also not be worth the cost . If you can afford it , you might want to buy long term care insurance for the options it offers you for your care . However , you would not need it to protect your assets if you do not have assets to protect . Long term care insurance IS worth the cost for those who have a lot to lose if they would have to pay expensive nursing home , assisted living , in home , or other care costs for an extended period of time . It also is worth the cost for those who have strong feelings about being able to pay for the type of care they want , rather than rely on where Medicaid allows .
Long Term Health Insurance -LRB- known as Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is worth it for some people and not for others . If you have a large amount of savings , investments , and/or property , Long Term Care Insurance can protect your estate by paying for the cost of caring for you if you can not care for yourself . If you have very little in the way of assets , LTCI may not be worth it , as Medicaid would cover the cost of staying in a nursing home . However , whether you have a large estate or not , Long Term Care Insurance does provide some freedom in choosing where you receive your care . And for some people that is worth the price of the insurance .
That depends on how long you could live without your paycheck . Long term disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income if you were to become sick or injured and could no longer work . Consider how much your ability to make an income is worth . If you make $ 50,000 per year and assuming you never got another raise and were planning on working for 30 more years , your income would be worth $ 1,500,000 -LRB- $ 50,000 X 30 -RRB- . This about it this way ... if your car is worth $ 15,000 and lets assume you pay $ 100 per month for car insurance . If your income is worth $ 1,500,000 , does n't it make sense to pay $ 100 per month for a long term disability policy to protect that ?
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Insurance ... . be it Disability Insurance or Long Term Care Insurance or Life Insurance or whatever type of insurance that you buy ... . is not really worth the money put into it unless you need it . But if you do need it , it is beyond worth it . Also , the peace of mind that having insurance gives has a value . So Aflac Disability Insurance is worth it if you become disabled . And if you do n't , it may be worth it to you to not have had to worry about the possibility of being without an income for any significant length of time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Whether Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is worth it to you depends on whether you can survive at least 5 months without your salary , or would be willing to work at a job you can do vs a job you were trained for . Both of these must occur before being able to get Social Security Disability . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance can pay approximately 60 % of your salary while recovering from a long illness of slow healing injury until you can get your old type of job back . That is worth it , to most people .
Is disability insurance worth having ? The answer depends on the individual . What we 're talking about with disability insurance is paycheck protection . Disability insurance does n't pay for a medical claim , at least not directly . Disability insurance simply creates a pot of money to use as you would with your paycheck . It is up to the individual to decide the worth of protecting their paycheck . Maybe if there 's passive income or massive savings the need for disability insurance may not be that great . But , if you 're not in that position financially , you should think long and hard about disability insurance .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Is Supplemental Disability Insurance worth it ? That is a great question . If you need almost all your income to support your family 's lifestyle and home , then it certainly could be worth it for you . Group Disability Insurance can end up paying you only 45 % of your income , after taxes , and has restrictive features that a Supplemental Disability Insurance policy will expand upon . Also , Supplemental Disability Insurance can bump the amount you would get paid during a disability to 70 % to 80 % of your income . Finally , Supplemental Disability Insurance is generally portable whereas group DI policies generally are not portable . So purchasing Supplemental Life Insurance while you are still insurable can ensure having Disability coverage for the rest of your life .
The cost of long-term care insurance has gone up dramatically in the last 10 years . To get an affordable policy for the average person today is a real challenge for the agent . The middle class consumer has , essentially , been priced out of the market for policy designs that were frequently used 10 years ago . To get an affordable policy , the agent has to think outside the box , and the middle class consumer has to understand the value of long-term care insurance . 1 . No long-term care policy can promise to pay for all of one 's potential end-of-life health care costs , no matter how muchone pays . 2 . Conventional designs are no longer valid for the vast majority of those that want an affordable LTC insurance policy . 3 . Long-term care insurance , however , is still a very important consideration . For a base policy , figure on it costing between $ 200 - $ 400/month depending on age . 4 . Even if the policyone can afford might only pay for 1/3 to 1/2 ofone 's projected costs , it would be worth it . It 's not just about cost , although that is an important factor . LTC insurance is for the caregiver , not the insured . The entire immediate family - and sometimes the extended family - is affected by an elderly loved one that ca n't take care of routine , daily activities , and needs attention 24/7 . The emotional , psychological , and physical energy expended collectively can be a huge impact to the caregiver -LRB- s -RRB- . Being able to afford even a short break now and then from caregiving can be the difference between the caregiver remaining healthy or getting sick as well . That 's the value of long-term care insurance . Some is better than none .
The average cost for an individual Long Term Disability policy is about 1 % to 3 % of your annual salary . The more bells and whistles you add onto your policy , the higher it will cost . Some features , like residual and own occupation , are worth it . Others , such as a very short elimination period , may not be worth the extra cost .
People who have very few assets and/or income should probably not get long term care insurance . If there are immediate needs that will go unmet because you are concerned about a possible long term care stay in the future , then the cost of long term care insurance may not be worth it . Also , if you may perhaps go on Medicaid in the future , even without needing long term care services , you should not purchase long term care insurance , in most situations .
As with all types of insurance , you are taking a chance that you will have paid into the policy for years and never used it . However , Long Term Disabilities occur much more often than people think , even to younger workers . Nearly half of all bankruptcies are due to becoming disabled and the resultant loss/cut in income . When you look at the financial consequences of becoming disabled , Long Term Disability Insurance is worth the cost for people who can squeeze it into their budget .
Long term disability insurance is a way to protect your income if you become sick or hurt and are unable to work . Think about it this way , your income is very valuable . if you take your annual income and multiply it by how many years you are planning on working , this is how much your income is worth . For someone making $ 50,000 and planning on working for 20 years , their income is worth $ 50,000 X 20 . That equals , $ 1,000,000 . People buy long term disability insurance to protect that $ 1,000,000 . Please feel free to contact me if you have any questions !
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Which Company Offers The Best Disability Insurance ?
There are many insurance companies that offer affordable disability insurance policies . Some of them include Mass Mutual , Hartford , Berkshire and Principal . Of course , there are many other very reliable and reputable insurers . A full-time broker or financial planner is the best resource for information and they can also shop for the best prices when you are ready to pursue this type of coverage .
The best disability policy for you is the policy that meets your needs in time of claim with the most affordable premium at time of purchase . There are a lot of companies that have disability products . It is more about having the right amount of benefit , elimination period and for the proper time limits than the company . I highly recommend using an experienced broker with access to multiple companies to shop for the best coverage at the best rate to meet you unique needs .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Unfortunately there 's no one company that offers the `` best '' term life insurance . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . There are 4 main factors that determine the rates for your life insurance policy - your age , risk classification , amount of coverage , and how long it 's guaranteed for . Your risk classification is the MOST important factor when looking for coverage . Some companies may offer you a better risk class than others because they each have their own underwriting guidelines and respond to specific medical histories differently . It is ALWAYS best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can compare multiple companies and shop the case for you and help determine the most likely risk classification you will qualify for with each company based on your medical history so you can figure out which company will offer you the desired coverage at the lowest rates - in short , which company will be your best starting point . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
The insurance company that offers the best disability plan is the company you purchase the policy from with the best coverage at the best price . There are too many factors that are in play when buying a disability insurance policy to state if one company is the best . There are several companies that do an outstanding job with disability coverage . I recommend using an independent broker to professionally shop for the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
To buy Disability Insurance online , go to a website that sells Disability Insurance and request a quote . It is very difficult to obtain an instant DI -LRB- Disability Insurance -RRB- quote because there are so many variables to DI policies . So using an online Contact Us form or emailing the website email address might work best . Keep in mind that many online websites that only give instant quotes for Life Insurance , also offer Disability Insurance quotes from a number of DI carriers -LRB- as our website does -RRB- . That is because licensed Life agents can also sell DI , and many of the same companies that offer good Life insurance policies also offer good Disability Insurance policies . Again , calling or emailing the website is your best way to determine where and how to purchase Disability Insurance online .
There is no one disability insurance company that is best for everyone . If you have a health condition , you may need to go with a company that carries graded disability insurance policies . If you are self employed , work part time , labor in a certain profession or trade , or have group coverage , the company that is best for you may be entirely different from the company that is best for someone else . To find which Disability Insurance companies have the best rating , you can look at their AM Best and other scores . You can also review the `` About Us '' tab on their websites to read about their history and strength .
There 's many companies that offer disability insurance such as Guardian , MetLife , Assurity , Standard , Principal , just to name a few . The DEFINITION OF DISABILITY is the single most important factor when determining which disability insurance policy to apply for . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Either you are referring to the best disability insurance company or the best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance . There are several excellent disability companies in the disability market place . One of the best is The Standard . The best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance is to determine if you can expense the premium as a business deduction and apply for 80 % of your compensation . While it is true that any benefits received will be subject to ordinary income tax , a deduction today is worth the risk of taxable event in the future . Nondeductible disability protects up to 60 % of your compensation with tax free distribution of benefits . If youre in a high tax bracket , the spread in benefits -LRB- 80 % versus 60 % -RRB- and the savings in the annual deduction are incentives to expense the premium if you have a legitimate business . Keep in mind that you can also buy disability insurance to cover your qualified plan contributions as well .
If you go to a website that offers free , instant life insurance quotes from multiple companies , you can enter some factors -LRB- date of birth , gender , term length , face amount , etc -RRB- and see which life insurance companies have the lowest quotes . If there were no questions about build or health , you are most likely viewing quotes for the best rate class , which may not be the class you qualify for . But that exercise does give you an idea of which companies offer the cheapest rates for term insurance for those in perfect health . Keep in mind that being overweight , having a health condition , or being older will probably result in other companies offering the cheapest rates . To find the lowest priced term life insurance rates for you , it is best to call an agent so that they can gather all these variables and do the shopping for you .
State Farm does have Disability Insurance that it offers for purchase . Their plans include regular Disability Insurance that pays a benefit to the disabled person to be used as they wish , which State Farm calls Disability Income Insurance . State Farm also offers Mortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are many excellent life insurance companies to choose from and the `` best '' is very subjective . One way to rate companies is by the financial ratings from AM Best or a similar rating company . I personally only use A rated companies or better , so my clients can feel confident that the life insurance company will be around 20 - 30 years or longer when the policy is needed . Many life insurance companies have been around over 100 years which is another testament to a stable company . A company may be the best for you because they offer a particular product with a unique rider that you want . Finally , a company that provides a better health rating , and therefore lower premium for your situation , may turn out to be the best for you . All of the above are reasons to work with a knowledgeable advisor to help you sort through the options and find the best company for your particular situation .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
There are many good Disability Insurance companies and hard to pick one `` best '' across the board . You can look at the rating of the company to get an idea of how solid the company is . If you have a particular occupation or health condition that makes it more difficult for you to find affordable Disability Insurance , the best Disability Insurance company for you could be a completely different one than for your neighbor . Contact an agency or broker that offers DI quotes from a number of companies and ask them not only to find your best rate , but to steer you with a DI company that you can trust .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
Who the best Annuity Company is depends on a few different things . Mostly the current annuity market and who currently has the most competitive rates . It also depends on your personal situation and needs and which company offers a product that fits those needs best . In other words , there is no best annuity company , it just depends . But it is important to use a company that has good financial ratings , and `` A '' or better is usually considered a good rating . So whichever well rated company offers the most competitive product that fits your needs , is the best company .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is Retirement Accumulation Plan ?
All qualified and non-qualified insurance product plans accumulate tax deferred . So it 's a bit of a mystery on what the question is addressing . Over time tax deferral can have a power economic impact on saving or investing for retirement . The tax favored feature oftax deferral accumulation is a significant advantage .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Yes you can have multiple retirement plans . In Canada for example your could have a pension plan and a group registered retirement savings plan -LRB- RRSP -RRB- through your employer . In addition you could have an individual RRSP and also spousal RRSP . A Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- could also be used for retirement planning since the accumulation grows tax free and withdrawals due not attract taxation . More information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Retirement planning can be seem overwhelming since it involves so many different issues . The most difficult part for most is clarifying what do you want your retirement to look like . Travel , hobbies , charity work , new work ? The point is , once you have clarified your objectives , you can work on the `` financials '' . How much do you need to accumulate ? What vehicles work best ? What about tax ? If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
Retirement doesnt change the nature of many risks faced by an individual . If you operate an automobile you will want sufficient insurance to meet any anticipated loss . It is important to remember that when you experience an uncovered loss and are retired the money to cover that loss will come from your retirement savings in most situations . Be sure to carry the highest possible liability limits . Consider an umbrella policy . If you own a home you will want sufficient insurance to protect valuable assets against loss . This is also a good time to increase the limit of liability insurance because a lawsuit could ruin your retirement plans . As people age they tend to acquire inherited property . That property needs to be reviewed and insured as appropriate . There are few of us that actually outgrow our need for life insurance . Our death is going to have a financial impact on those we love . To that extent consider permanent insurance . Single premium life insurance can play a particularly helpful role in paying final expenses but also can be used to establish bequests . Many retirees carefully protect their savings so they can pass something to their heirs . It might be beneficial to establish those gifts through life insurance and thus be able to spend freely the money that remains . Life insurance is also needed if the death of one spouse will have a serious impact on the retirement income of the survivor . Sometimes it is appropriate to select a life income option on a pension plan or annuity and then purchase life insurance to make up the loss of survivor benefit . Many retirees are concerned about charities and life insurance is a wonderful way to handle those interests as well . The most ominous issue for most retirees is long term care . Studies show that these expenses are one of the top concerns among retirees . With the increase in longevity comes an increased possibility of having a long term care need . Considering long term care insurance in a retirement budget is important . Health tends to decline , not improve with age . One option available is to take advantage of the Health Savings Accounts typically offered by employers who are enrolled in their companies high deductible plans . This tax incentive allows the individuals to contribute with pre-tax dollars and enjoy the gain on investments held in the account tax-free . Employers are often linking the HSA to the retirement program which helps employees understand that they can use the account to accumulate money for their medical needs in retirement . Some people will accumulate a substantial amount . Since these funds are not subject to required minimum distributions at seventy and a half they can continue to increase in value until needed . Because Medicare doesnt provide complete medical coverage most retirees purchase a Medigap supplemental insurance policy from a private insurance company . State administrators are involved in the coverage that these policies provide and sometimes in their pricing . Another form of insurance available to seniors is longevity insurance . This is effectively a deferred income annuity which isnt means tested until age 85 . Traditional Long term care insurance should not be overlooked . While the cost is subject to a great deal of debate the alternative is to assume the risk personally . Hybrid life and annuity policies can provide long term care coverage under certain conditions . In retirement expenses continue and retirees are often called upon to select between their own needs and the wants and desires of heirs . Anything that can be done to fence off expenses can make difficult decisions easier .
A tax deferred Retirement Plan is a plan that allow the grow to accumulate tax free while it is inside the plan and taxed when it is withdrawn . This tax deferred growth provides a significant advantage over plans that are taxed each year . Why ? Because you get the full effect of compound interest . In Canada , a Registered Retirement Savings Plan RRSP -RRB- not only offers tax deferred growth , it also offers -LRB- subject to limits -RRB- tax deductibility of contributions . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
There are two types of tax deferred retirement plans : qualified and non-qualified . Qualified plans that can accumulate tax deferred like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- s are under ERISA , The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . Non-qualified retirement plans that use life insurance and annuities accumulate tax deferred as well .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
A pension plan is a retirement plan , generally a defined benefit plan . Most employer sponsored qualified retirement plans are now defined contribution plans where the employees can contribute pretax dollars into their retirement plan and accumulate in those accounts tax deferred . At the time of retirement distributions are taxed as ordinary income .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Generally speaking , a qualified retirement plan is one legislated by the government with tax advantaged features to attract American workers to save for retirement . One example is The Employee Retirement Income Security act of 1974 -LRB- ERISA -RRB- that addresses defined benefit and defined contribution plans . And one of the most popular employer sponsored defined contribution retirement plans is a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . Plan participants can make pretax contributions that accumulate tax deferred and some employers match a portion of the employee 's contribution . Of course distributions at retirement are taxed as ordinary income and there are penalties for distributions before age 591/2 .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Premium Increase ?
Health insurance premiums do not increase during the plan year . However , there are a variety of reasons why the premium may increase -LRB- or decrease -RRB- from one year to the next . If an insurance company feels that the benefits that they are offering with a specific plan are costing them more than they expected , they may raise the rates for the same plan for the next year . Conversely , if the benefits are costing them less than expected , they can lower the rate to encourage more people to sign up for that option . The main reason your rates are likely to go up each year however is that you are getting older . The older a person is , the more likely they will need to use more benefits . The Affordable Care Act allows insurance companies to charge up to three times more for older members on a plan than for younger members .
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
-- > Normal 0 Whether anyone wants to admit it or not , insurance consumers tend to seek ways to reduce their insurance expenses while insurance providers are always looking for ways to increase their revenue . A rate increase is one alternative insurers might use to increase your premium but more often than not your premium frequently increases for other reasons . An insurer 's base rates are only one factor that goes into the calculation of your actual insurance premium . You should know what those factors are . The most common factor may be an increase in your amount of insurance . Your insurance company may claim construction costs in your area have increased and your amounts of insurance have been increased accordingly . That may be true but higher limits do n't always mean higher premiums . Discounts they may have applied in prior years may have changed or been discontinued . Penalties may have been applied if you had a claim or your credit score has changed . Rate categories may change as your home gets older . The reasons can be endless . But that doesnt mean you have to simply accept the increase . Question the reason for any increase . Determine if you are eligible for other discounts or credits . Consider other insurers who might offer you more favorable premium treatment . In my experience , insurers rates dont change all that often , and they can go up or down . Other factors used to calculate your final premium are usually the reason you see your premiums go up so often . Be proactive , a little effort and a few questions could save you a lot of money .
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Yes , unless they are guaranteed to stay `` level '' , life insurance premiums can increase . One of the biggest factors on how much life insurance costs , is the length of time for which you lock in your premiums . E.g. . If you buy a 10 year level term policy , the premium will be relatively low , but will only stay the same for 10 years . After that , the premium will increase drastically . However , if you buy a permanent policy with guaranteed level premiums , the initial premium will be higher , but you will never experience a rate increase . When you are approved for a life insurance policy , you will see right at the front of the printed policy how long your premium is guaranteed to stay level , and at what point the premiums could/will increase . If you are nearing a point in your policy where your premiums will go up , you might want to take care of that now , as you may have options now that will not be available after the premium increase takes effect .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
Prior to 2014 it was reasonable to anticipate annual increases in group and individual health insurance in the high single digits to low teen 's range . Though , of course , these are just generalized averages and a host of other factors could move rates higher or , in rarer instances , lower . We have already seen the base cost of health insurance increase fairly substantially in 2014 due to the implementation of the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . The effect was especially pronounced in the individual health insurance market of almost every state due to the mandatory addition of new benefits , the move to the community rating approach , the elimination of underwriting and adjusting rates for risk , and making all policies guaranteed to be issued without pre-existing condition limitations or exclusions . In mid-2014 we are just now beginning to receive health insurance companies filings for their proposed 2015 rates . While the rate filings vary from state to state and from insurance carrier to insurance carrier , individual health insurance rate increases in the teens to 25 % or more are being reported in many areas across the nation . In some limited instances though , you are seeing some filings requesting rate reductions but these are pretty rare . Therefore , most people should be prepared to see their rates for individual health insurance increase meaningfully again in 2015 , though this effect may be hidden to some extent for those persons who qualify for premium tax subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Many small business groups are also seeing substantial rate increases in their renewal actions for the 2014-2015 benefit year . Increases of 20 % to 40 % are not uncommon .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
As Frank indicated , homeowner insurance premiums should not necessarily increase each year . To make sure your coverage stays current , you should look at the replacement cost necessary to rebuild the home on a regular basis . This number may well increase for a number of reasons , which can increase your insurance premium . At the same time , you can often offset potential premium increases by making your property profile more attractive to insurance companies , such as security and other system upgrades . If your premiums are increasing , then your agent or broker should explain why . Otherwise , this could be a sign that you need to consider other insurance partners who will take a more active role in making sure you have the best policy and premium for your situation .
Yes , No , Maybe . Depends what perspective you ask the question . Insured wants to know if their premium , co-payments , deductible and max out of pocket are going to increase ? Normally premiums are guaranteed for a year , unless you have a birthday that moves you into next premium category . Or , there is a regulatory rate increase . Or possibly mandatory dental linked with major medical that is implemented in 2015 . Providers . Costs will probably increase . Costs of providing care will depend on how efficient a business person the doctor , and or facility perform . Insurer . Probably . Newly insured will access health care in the next few years that otherwise would have waited . The hope is to catch potential expensive conditions in early stage , thus reducing overall cost . The migration to electronic record keeping can increase short term costs with hopeful long term efficiencies . Are health insurance costs going to increase in 2015 ? Yep , Nope , Maybe
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
Health insurance premiums do n't always increase on renewal , but it seems that way . In the last few years I have had several clients whose premium actually DROPPED at renewal , but those are indeed rare situations . Health care costs increase from year to year as does utilization . These factors contribute to putting pressure on premiums . Carriers have to increase rates to keep their block financially sound .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about your Home Insurance policy and what specifically may cause the premium to increase in your case . In general , there are a number of factors that can contribute to a premium increase . For example , it is likely that your policy has an `` inflation guard '' provision that increases the dwelling amount provided each year . If the dwelling amount on your home increased over last year , that would certainly account for a premium increase . If you suffered a covered loss and had to file a claim , that might affect your renewal premium . If your area was hit with heavy weather related losses , like the ice daming that the North East and specificlally CT was plagued by , even if yo were not affected , your company might have had to take a rate adjustment as a result of the losses . Your Insurance professional wil be able to review your coverage and advise you not only as to why the policy may have increased , but also ways to save .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can You Use Medicare As Secondary Insurance ?
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
No , Medicare is not always primary . If you are still working and have group coverage then Medicare could be secondary . If your employer has more than 20 employees then your Medicare would be secondary . In most cases , however , Medicare is primary . If you have a Medicare supplement , the supplement is secondary .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA Benefits . One plan will be a secondary payer . Since the Veterans Administration benefits must be used at VA facilities , usually Medicare is secondary to the VA insurance . However , sometimes VA drug benefits are a good supplemental plan to Medicare , and thus becomes the secondary payer .
Secondary market annuities offer fixed term payment streams from top quality insurance carriers . The high quality creditworthiness of the insurance carriers usually translates to lower returns to the investor , however secondary market annuities come with yields one to four percent higher than comparable assets . The term secondary market annuity has become an industry standard referring to a factored structured settlement , previously owned annuity or in-force annuity . Secondary market annuities offer all the benefits of the primary market , period certain , guaranteed yield annuity.Simply put , secondary market annuities offer higher returns without additional risk . Hope this Helps Tyson Wright SMA Hub , Inc. .
If you are talking about being covered by group health insurance and also covered by Medicare then it will depend upon the size of the employer group you are working for . If your employer has less than20 employees then Medicare is the primary payer -LRB- pays first -RRB- and the group health insurance pays in a secondary capacity . If your employer has more than 20 + employees then the group health insurance plan pays first and Medicare pays in a secondary capacity . This is the simplest and generally most common scenarios where this question comes up . However , there are numerous other situations a person may be in -LRB- eligible for Medicare and Medicaid , disabled , retired and still covered under a former employer 's plan , etc. -RRB- where other primary vs. secondary payer rules come into play that are too numerous to go into here . For more detailed information I would recommend that you go to Medicare.gov as they are an excellent resource for detailed information on the entire range of these issues .
If you are still working and your employer allows you to stay on the group coverage and you are 65 and enroll into Medicare then your group insurance is primary and medicare is secondary . What if you have medicare and medicaid-medicare pays first . What if you have retired and you have coverage through the group plan-Medicare pays first . What if you are disabled but your spouse is still working and you are covered by the grou plan-if fewer than 100 employees - Medicare pays first-if more than 100 employees-the group plan pays first . What if you have End Stage Renal Disease-during the first 30 months the group plan pays first and medicare secondary ; afgter 30 months Medicare pays first and the group plan is secondary . If you have End Stage Renal Disease AND Cobra - first 30 months Cobra is primary and medicare is seondary and after first 30 months Medicare is primary and Cobra is secondary . If your case is not shown just ask if your case is preimary or secondary on the internet
If your only health insurance plan is Medicare , then Medicare is primary . When you have a Medicare supplement plan , Medicare is primary and your Medigap plan is secondary . If you have coverage under an employer group health insurance plan , and the employer has fewer than 20 employees , Medicare is primary . If there are 20 or more employees , the group plan is primary and Medicare is secondary .
If you have group coverage you may not need to pick up Medicare part B right away depending on the size of your group . Medicare coordinates with your health insurance . For smaller groups it will be primary , for larger groups it would be secondary . Primary means that Medicare pays first and your health insurance would act like a supplement . Secondary means that your insurance pays first and Medicare would just help pay any deductibles and copay 's . You do not need a Medicare supplement if you have group health insurance in most cases . If you have prescriptions covered at work do not pick up a Medicare Advantage plan or prescription drug plan without discussing it with your HR rep. You could get knocked off your group coverage and not be able to get it back .
In most cases , Medicare is primary and COBRA is secondary . But there are situations where your COBRA plan would be primary . If you are on Medicare as a result of ESRD -LRB- end stage renal disease -RRB- the role is reversed and COBRA is primary , Medicare secondary . You can review the Medicare publication `` Who Pays First '' for more detail .
The factors that determine whether Medicare is primary or secondary are involved . E.g. For a business that has over 20 employees eligible for health insurance , Medicare is usually primary for those age 65 and older . If the business has under 20 employees , the employer 's plan is primary . You can go to this website to find out if Medicare is primary or secondary payer in your situation . WEBSITELINK . You could also call 1-800-MEDICARE to ask about specific situations .
A secondary beneficiary for life insurance is also called a contingent beneficiary . A secondary beneficiary is not the same as being the second primary beneficiary listed . If there is more than one primary beneficiary , the death benefit is split among the primary beneficiaries . A secondary , or contingent , beneficiary only receives the death benefit if all primary beneficiaries are deceased .
In most situations the answer to your question is based upon the size of the employer group . If the group has on average 20 or fewer employees then Medicare is the primary payer in a dual coverage situation -LRB- Medicare + group coverage -RRB- . If the group has more than 20 employees then the employer 's insurance coverage is in the primary pay position and Medicare is secondary . This covers the vast amount of situations . As with every government program there are other rules and thresholds that can apply in a variety of other situations to numerous to list here . One that may be encountered by some people is when they or a covered dependent become disabled . In that circumstance , for employers with an average of 99 or fewer employees then Medicare is the primary payer on that disabled person and the employer 's group plan is secondary . For more information or advice feel free to contact me .
If you do not have group coverage or you work for a small employer then Medicare is primary and any other insurance is secondary . Larger employers group coverage would be primary and Medicare secondary . The cut off is 20 employees . More than 20 , group pays first , less than 20 Medicare pays first .
There are specific situations where Medicare is secondary to a primary coverage plan . The most common one is when you , or your spouse , are covered under an employer group health insurance plan and that employer has 20 or more full time employees . The group plan is primary , Medicare secondary . The two plans coordinate . In most cases Medicare will pay little or nothing .
For most persons , Medicare is your primary insurance . That means it is your coverage that pays first , up to the limits of benefits you have . If there are additional expenses that Medicare does not cover , you can have a secondary carrier that will pay some of those expenses . It is also possible for Medicare to be a secondary carrier . One example would be in specific instances where your employer -LRB- or spouse 's employer -RRB- provides healthcare coverage . Then , that coverage would pay first .
An individual can have two health insurance plans at once , but they probably wo n't receive any additional benefits . The most common time this occurs is when a person is covered with their own employer 's insurance and also covered by their spouse 's policy . In this case , the insurance with their own employer would considered primary and the spouse 's policy would pay little to nothing . Another instance may be a person that retires from the military and gets insurance through their new employer . The individual would need to speak to the veteran 's affairs office for details on this situation . The final way a person may have two insurance plans is when they are covered by Medicare and a secondary insurance such as a Medicare Advantage plan . In this example , Medicare would be the primary insurance and pay approximately 80 % of medical costs . The secondary insurance would then go into effect and cover the remaining 20 % according to the rules of the individual policy .
If the beneficiary is deceased and there is no secondary beneficiary named then the proceeds would go into the estate . This means that the life insure will now become subject to probate . I highly suggest naming a secondary -LRB- contingent -RRB- beneficiary to your life insurance policies if you have n't already done so . If you can not find your agent , call the company and they can send you the forms . If you still have problems a good experienced agent can help .
Yes , you can generally have any number of health insurance plans you want . Several people have a primary and secondary health insurer . The secondary insurance typically covers health care costs that the primary insurance policy does not cover . If you do have two health insurance plans , you should be sure to make the health care provider well aware of this fact so they know to coordinate between the multiple insurers and bill accordingly .
Joint life insurance refers to a life insurance policy that has a primary insured and a secondary insured , usually a spouse , on the same policy . There is usually a bigger down side to these policies than an upside . These type of life insurance policies are usually term policies and when the primary or the secondary dies the remaining spouse will lose their coverage . The spouse will be underwritten along with the primary , so there is not a huge advantage to these policies . I recommend purchasing separate term life policies to protect your insurability . These policies are also called First to Die life insurance policies .
The primary beneficiary named by the policy owner receives life insurance proceeds when the insured dies . It is a good idea to also name a contingent -LRB- back up or secondary -RRB- beneficiary and review the policy every three years with a life insurance professional . Over time things may change e.g. beneficiaries sometimes predecease the insured . If there is no named , living beneficiary of the life insurance policy when the insured dies , and no contingent -LRB- secondary -RRB- beneficiary , the proceeds are paid to the estate . It is not an ideal outcome since this subjects the proceeds to probate which would not have occurred if there was a beneficiary .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover No Heat ?
No , under the provisions of a typical renters insurance policy no heat in the apartment or rented premise would not be covered by the policy . If you have an equipment breakdown endorsement on your policy the cost of repair to the heating unit may be covered possibly less your policy deductible . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
No , under the provisions of a typical renters insurance policy no heat in the apartment or rented premise would not be covered by the policy . If you have an equipment breakdown endorsement on your policy the cost of repair to the heating unit may be covered possibly less your policy deductible . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
It depends on what happened to your heating system . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . Homeowners insurance is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover items damaged due to wear and tear or age . Ifthe heating system caught fire or was damage from lightning you would be covered . If the system is just not working properly because it 's old than unfortunately there is no coverage .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
A homeowners policy pays for damages caused by specified perils . If the heating system in a home is damaged by fire , for example , it would have been caused by a specified peril . If it broke because of age or poor maintenance , it wouldnt be covered . Those arent specified perils . Recently there have been thefts of the tubing going to heat pumps . That would probably be covered .
Geico itself does not generally issue renters insurance but rather brokers it through other insurance carriers . Still the price will depends on the value of the items you wish you cover , the location of the apartment or home rented , your heating source , and other risk assessment variables . Because of the degree of variability it is difficult to give a general answer to cost , but you can easily obtain this answer by contacting Geico 's customer service for a quote .
Not all ! Accidental discharge of water and its attendant damages is normally covered . This means when there is an accidental discharge of liquids or steam from the plumbing , heating or air-conditionaing the loss is a covered loss . It is very important to understand what is not covered . Flood is one of the most common causes of loss in the US and the homeowner 's policy does not cover it . Water back up such as from a blocked sewer line is not a covered loss -LRB- some companies offer the coverage as an option . -RRB- When there is repeated or continuous seepage or leakage from a system in the house that is not covered .
I am not quite sure what you are asking here , so I will try and answer two questions . First , renters insurance will not cover any direct physical damage to an above ground pool caused by the common perils . Second , it will cover physical damage to the pool caused by your negligence . An example of this could be you leave numerous pressurized containers in your rented space , which , due to the summer heat , explode and damage the pool . So , no all perils damage , but you can get coverage for your negligence .
The cost of renters insurance from Nationwide will depend on several factors including the value of your items kept in the apartment or house , the location of the building , the age of the building , and your heating source within the building . Based on the variability of all these items , it 's nearly impossible to answer this questions without more information about these items .
Electrolysis is the permanent removal of hair from the face or body . The process involves destruction of the hair growth center by heat or chemical treatment . In most cases , the desire to remove facial or body hair is a cosmetic issue and not considered a medically necessary treatment . Health insurance generally does not cover cosmetic treatment .
Homeowners policies cover your `` dwelling '' and that would include any service equipment which is physically attached to the dwelling including boilers used to provide heat . Assuming you have a standard Homeowner Policy Form # 3 or its ' equivalent or better , the boiler would be covered for `` risk of direct loss '' unless specifically limited or excluded . You will find an exclusion for any loss `` caused by '' wear and tear , mechanical breakdown and such but note this exclusion does n't exclude any loss `` resulting from '' mechanical breakdown or wear and tear to your boiler . So I would conclude your homeowner 's policy should provide coverage for your boiler should it be damaged from some external cause and also for damage `` resulting from '' any internal cause .
Check with your insurance agent to find out if you have a `` named peril '' or `` all risk '' policy . This will help you determine when your water heater is covered under a homeowners policy . Normal wear and tear or maintenance is not covered . However , some companies are now offering a separate home warranty policy that can cover plumbing , electrical , heating and applicances .
Homeowners Insurance will cover any home fixtures against perils covered by the policy ; i.e. Fire , Vandalism , Wind etc. . . If your quetsion refers to the maintenance or repair of your heating system , your question should be referred to your Home Warranty coverage and not your homeowners insurance . In very few cases , homeowners insurance policies may offer a warranty endorsement which can be purchased and added on to your homeowners insurance policy . You must consult your present insurance carrier and inquire as to whether a home warranty endorsement is available and the premium charged .
No , Condo Owner 's Insurance is not included in your fees . Generally -LRB- refer to your master association document -RRB- the Association would insure from the wall studs out -LRB- siding , insulation , roof -RRB- and will carry liability to cover the association . You need to insure from the wall studs in . That includes sheetrock , trim , cabinets , carpet , personal property and your own liability risk . Condo insurance is not very expensive since most claims happen on the outside of the building -LRB- wind and hail -RRB- . A specific area to look at is weather or not your heating and cooling equipment is covered by the assocation , or if you need to insure it .
Typically no . How water damage coverage works is your walls , floors , ceiling and personal property will be covered by leaking pipes . This means if a pipe bursts your everything else except the pipes will be covered . Now there are a couple of exceptions to this , one if your home is vacant for 90 days or more ; or if you do n't heat your home properly and the pipes freeze . I said typically because you can always buy back the coverage , meaning you can spend a little extra money to make pipes a covered item in your policy . However , this is usually not a great concern for people because there is coverage to replace everything else , and tear apart and the area where the leak occurred . You are just left with the bill for the pipes and replacing them . Hope this helps .
Great question ! Warranty insurance can cover a variety of things from insurer to insurer , so this is one type of policy that it really pays to do your homework on . Most will cover the basics : heating , plumbing , electrical , and built in appliances . As you pay more , the coverage expands from there . I can not advise you enough - find a good independent agent to help you find a policy that will give you the coverage you desire , at a price that is affordable . These policies can vary widely in cost and coverage , and the agent can save you from a lot of heartbreak later on . Thank you for asking !
If I am understanding it correctly you are asking about the compressors and not the overall system that uses the same duct work as your heating system . If that is not correct I apologize , but that is what I think you are referring to . In which case you are asking if a failed compressor is covered under your policy.The answer is it depends on what caused it to stop working . If it is hit by lightning , then that is typically covered . If it stops because it just reaches an age where it will no longer operate , the answer is no .
Unless there are extenuating circumstances behind the removal of the oil tank , I do n't believe that the removal would be covered under any homeowners policy . This would typically be designated as a maintainance issue not a claim issue . If the home is being converted to gas or electric heat from oil it would be the homeowners responsibility to dispose of the oil tank properly .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance With Polycystic Kidney Disease ?
While it is possible to obtain life insurance having polycystic kidney disease , certain underwriting conditions apply . Depending upon that determination your only option might be a small guaranteed issue policy . I would recommend contacting an agency that specializes in impaired risk life insurance to address your specific health issues and offer the best solution / quote for your needs ...
If you have polycystic kidney disease with normal renal function and controlled blood pressure , you can get a medically underwritten policy of any size , with a table rating . If your kidney function is abnormal and/or you are on dialysis or awaiting a kidney transplant , your only choice may be a small guaranteed issue policy . Consult an agency that specializes in impaired risk life insurance to gather the pertinent health details and your best quote .
Depending upon the applicant 's age and ultrasound results , it is possible in certain cases to obtain life insurance coverage . The range of premium cost would also take into consideration your age and any other medical issues . Your ability to obtain coverage will significantly increase when your original diagnosis is at or over age 50 .
If you have polycystic kidney disease with normal renal function and controlled blood pressure , you can get a medically underwritten policy of any size , with a table rating . If your kidney function is abnormal and/or you are on dialysis or awaiting a kidney transplant , your only choice may be a small guaranteed issue policy . Consult an agency that specializes in impaired risk life insurance to gather the pertinent health details and your best quote .
While it is possible to obtain life insurance having polycystic kidney disease , certain underwriting conditions apply . Depending upon that determination your only option might be a small guaranteed issue policy . I would recommend contacting an agency that specializes in impaired risk life insurance to address your specific health issues and offer the best solution / quote for your needs ...
PCOS -LRB- Polycystic Ovary Syndrome -RRB- can affect life insurance , depending on the severity and treatment . If you are taking metformin for control of your PCOS , be sure that you use a company that will distinguish that from having diabetes . Using an impaired risk life insurance agency can help you get an accurate quote and avoid being put with a company that will treat you unfairly .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you have kidney disease , but the type of policy you get will depend on what stage of kidney disease you have . If it is over stage 1 , you most likely will need to get a simplified issue or guaranteed issue policy , which will have a limit on the face amount .
Can you get life insurance with Kidney Disease ? Well what kind of kidney disease is it ? How long have you had it ? How is it treated ? and so on ... You need to find an agent who can take your information -LRB- much more information is needed before a real quote can be generated -RRB- and submit it for pre underwriting review . This usually takes 2 or 3 weeks , but gives you a great idea of cost and availability of plans for you . You should not be obligated to buy , but you should be willing to provide the information for an honest review . You might not get back what you want to hear , but it will be an honest answer to your situation .
Urine testing can give indications of kidney disease , but kidneys are involved in more than just renal disease . E.g. Protein in the urine can be a sign of uncontrolled diabetes . Urinalysis can evidence hypertension , or show that the applicant is not complying with treatment for hypertension -LRB- i.e. not taking their blood pressure medication as prescribed -RRB- . Urinalysis is also used to help determine whether the applicant uses tobacco or illegal drugs , or abuses drugs or alcohol .
Yes , Medicare will provide coverage for a kidney transplant . Please note , how Medicare pays and how long the coverage will be for can vary based on a number of factors such as if you 're under 65 and on Medicare due to End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- , if you 're 65 or older and already on Medicare , etc. . There 's a guidebook on Medicare 's website that provides the specific coverage guidelines for each situation regarding kidney treatments called `` Medicare Coverage of Kidney Dialysis & Kidney Transplant Services '' . The link to the page is below : WEBSITELINK You should have both Medicare Part A & Part B in force and I would highly , highly recommend having a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in coverage Part A & Part B do n't cover . In short , your Part A & Part B coverage only covers about 80 % of the expenses . That other 20 % can become a very high dollar amount after all is said and done . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A life insurance physical tests for signs of tobacco , drug use , and illness . All these are factors that can cause life insurance to cost more , or to be declined . Some of the illnesses they are looking for are diabetes , coronary artery disease , kidney disease , liver disease , and blood diseases .
Life insurance companies use blood tests to screen for HIV , nicotine , and illegal drug use . They perform lab tests that might possibly point to a diagnosis of diabetes , liver disease , coronary artery disease , kidney disease , blood diseases , and others . If abnormal lab results are found , they might ask you to get checked by a physician before proceeding with your application . If the results are just slightly abnormal , or not pointing to a serious health condition , they may just go ahead and approve the policy , but at a higher rate .
The tests that are run for most medically underwritten life insurance policies are urinalysis and CBC -LRB- complete blood count -RRB- . These tests look for abnormalities that may indicate heart disease . blood diseases , kidney disease , liver disease , or diabetes . They also test for HIV and the presence of cotinine -LRB- a byproduct of nicotine -RRB- .
Most people with diabetes can get life insurance . Children with type 1 diabetes are the notable exception ; it is very difficult to find a policy for them until they are at least age 18 . All the more reason to add your children to a child rider or get them a policy of their own while they are very young , especially if diabetes runs in the family . The types of policies that you can get while having diabetes , are as varied as the persons with type 1 , 1.5 , 2 , or gestational diabetes . Underwriters will look at your history of control , with A1C being the dominant indicator , but also at whether you have current complications such as neuropathy , heart disease , or kidney disease . They will look at your age of diagnosis , the length of time you have had diabetes , and the types of treatments you have had . Based on all this data , the insurance company will determine how to rate you . People with diabetes can be rated Preferred all the way to a high table rating . If your blood glucose is too high or you have too many complications to get a medically underwritten policy , there are simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies available for most people . Contact an impaired risk life insurance specialist with experience in life insurance for people with diabetes , to be sure that you get placed with a company that will approve you at the best possible rate .
A life insurance urine test along with a blood test with larger policies are checking for two categories . The first series is looking for drugs , both illegal and prescription to test against medical records for abuse . Underwriting will test for nicotine and cotine , which stays in the system longer than just nicotine for tobacco use . The second set of tests are used to check for diseases like cancer , diabetes , heart disease , blood disorders , kidney disease , etc. . These results are usually compared to the individuals medical records for their risk assessment .
Urinalysis -LRB- UA -RRB- is used by life insurance companies to detect presence of disease when applying for medically underwritten policies . Urine tests used can point to the possibility of kidney disease , UTI , diabetes , liver disease , inflammation , even cancer . Sometimes excessive exercise or dieting can affect the HOS , so try to drink a lot of water , avoid alcohol , eat balanced meals , and avoid excessive exercise in the days before your urine test . Life insurance also uses urine to test for drug and tobacco use . If you use opoids -LRB- codeine , morphine , methadone , etc -RRB- for pain , or marijuana for medical or recreational use , explain that on your application or to the examiner collecting your urine sample . And keep in mind that cotinine -LRB- a metabolite of nicotine that is detected in urine and blood -RRB- can stay in the body for a long time after using tobacco . It is best to disclose all health conditions , medications , and tobacco use to your agent ahead of time , rather than have it be a surprise on your life insurance exam . That way you can be matched with the company that will give you the best rate , your underwriter will rate you as good as possible due to your honesty , and your policy will pay out if something happens to you .
Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . If you arent yet 65 , you might also qualify for coverage if you have a disability or with End-Stage Renal disease -LRB- permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant -RRB- . Here are some simple guidelines . You can get Part A at age 65 without having to pay premiums if : You already get retirement benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You are eligible to get Social Security or Railroad benefits but have n't yet filed for them . You or your spouse had Medicare-covered government employment . If you are under 65 , you can get Part A without having to pay premiums if you have : Received Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board disability benefits for 24 months . End-Stage Renal Disease and meet certain requirements . While you do not have to pay a premium for Part A if you meet one of these conditions , you must pay for Part B if you want it . The Part B monthly premium in 2013 is $ 104.90 per month . It is deducted from your Social Security , Railroad Retirement , or Civil Service Retirement check . If you dont get any of the above payments , Medicare sends you a bill for your Part B premium every 3 months . Note : You will be eligible for Medicare when you turn 65 even if you are not eligible for Social Security retirement benefits .
ESRD stands for End-Stage Renal Disease . This represents a complete kidney failure requiring dialysis or a kidney transplant . ESRD is one way that people can qualify for Medicare before they turn 65 . However , many Medicare Supplements and Medicare Advantage plans will not accept patients who have Medicare because of ESRD .
Ensure is covered by Medicare if some conditions are met . Eligible persons for receiving Medicare reimbursed Ensure drinks will : 1 -RRB- Have diabetes , 2 -RRB- have kidney disease , 3 -RRB- had a kidney transplant in the last 3 years , OR 4 -RRB- been referred to receive nutritional therapy services and Ensure by a medical doctor as being medically necessary .
The life insurance company takes blood and urine tests during the life insurance application process in order to test for a number of things . They are looking for evidence of heart disease as indicated by cholesterol and other lipids , diabetes as evidenced by glucose , liver function , kidney function , blood diseases , tobacco use , drug use and HIV , among others .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Is The Usual Beneficiary For Life Insurance Policies ?
The usual beneficiary for life insurance policies depends on the type of policy . If a personal policy and the insured person is married , the usual beneficiary is usually the spouse . If a single person , the beneficiary is often a parent , romantic partner , or sibling . If a business policy , the beneficiary is often the business or business partner . If a policy to cover a loan , the beneficiary is usually a spouse with assignment to the loan company .
The usual beneficiaries of a life policy is the spouse or children however if a person has a financial interest as in business they to can be the beneficiary . . This is sometimes the case with a key man policy when a business co ers maybea FRi , top sales person based on their value to the business .
Great question ! The beneficiary is the person or thing -LRB- in some cases -RRB- that you wish to leave your money to . People typically leave it to a close family member , but there are people that leave it to , trust funds , churches , or charities . I remember not too long ago about reading about the lady in New York City that left her fortune to her dogs ... Thanks for asking !
The usual beneficiary for life insurance policies depends on the type of policy . If a personal policy and the insured person is married , the usual beneficiary is usually the spouse . If a single person , the beneficiary is often a parent , romantic partner , or sibling . If a business policy , the beneficiary is often the business or business partner . If a policy to cover a loan , the beneficiary is usually a spouse with assignment to the loan company .
The beneficiaries of a life insurance policy pay in a certain order . First is the primary beneficiary which can be a person , a few people paid by percentage , or an institution , such as to repay a loan . Second is the contingent beneficiary . The contingent beneficiary is paid if the primary benefit dies before or with the insured . Third is the tertiary beneficiary . This beneficiary receives life insurance proceeds if all of the primary and contingent beneficiaries die before or with the insured . If the later beneficiaries are not named on the policy , then life insurance proceeds roll into the estate and will be subject to probate and estate taxes . This is always as shame as life insurance proceeds are usually not taxed if there is a named beneficiary . Be sure and work with a knowledgeable agent or advisor to be sure your life insurance policy is set up correctly .
If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and you have a wage garnishment out against you , what can be garnished depends on the rules of the state . Federal law sets limits on what can be garnished , but states can add to those limitations . Consult an attorney if your wages are being garnished and you are set to become the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , or have recently received proceeds of a life insurance policy . If it is the deceased person who was insured by the life insurance policy whose wage were being garnished , or who owed substantial debt , the money received by the beneficiary is usually safe from creditors to whom the deceased owed money . If the insured person left his money to his estate , or there were no living beneficiaries on his policy to receive the death benefit , then creditors have access to money left to the estate . But money left to a person as beneficiary belongs to the beneficiary and is not accessible to creditors for the deceased .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
Of course ! You have the option to put on primary beneficiaries , contingent beneficiaries -LRB- in case the primary predeceases the insured -RRB- , and even tertiary beneficiaries if you 'd like -LRB- in case the primary and contingent beneficiaries predecease the insured -RRB- . Each level -LRB- primary , contingent , and tertiary -RRB- can have more than one beneficiary . You also want to make sure to designate what happens to a beneficiary 's share if he/she predeceases the insured -LRB- especially if there is more than 1 beneficiary - e.g. does it go to the other beneficiary ? to the estate ? to someone else ? etc. -RRB- The other thing you want to make sure of is that the policy structure does not violate the `` Goodman Triangle '' -LRB- named after a court case -RRB- . The Goodman Triangle , in short , states that 2 of the 3 parties of a life insurance contract must be the same to avoid certain tax consequences -LRB- same owner and beneficiary with a different insured or same owner and insured with a different beneficiary -RRB- . If you want to place more than one beneficiary on the policy , the owner and insured would have to be the same person to not violate the Goodman Triangle . When the Goodman Triangle is violated , the situation can result in the monies being subject to estate taxes or gift tax consequences . If a policy is owned by a trust such as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , the insured and beneficiary will be the trust and the insured will be the person who 's life the trust was created for . The trust would illustrate all of the payout structure scenarios when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
In Canada if you have a named beneficiary and not your estate then the proceeds bypass probate and are paid directly to the beneficiary . If you name a beneficiary in the `` protected class '' , spouse , parent , child , grandchild , then the policy is potentially protected from the owner 's creditors during the lifetime of the person whose life is insured . In all provinces except Quebec , the relationship must be between the life insured and the beneficiary . In Quebec , it is between the owner and the beneficiary . If you designate a beneficiary as irrevocable , then the policy also has potential creditor protection . In addition no changes to the policy can be made without the irrevocable beneficiary 's consent . If a corporation is owner and paying the premiums on a policy , the the company should be the beneficiary otherwise it will be considered to be a taxable benefit . Ultimately , who should be named the beneficiary depends on what you want to accomplish . If you have any further question or feel I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community ,
What does life insurance beneficiary mean ? Well , a life insurance beneficiary is usually the other party in an insurance contract . They are part of the policy , but do not have qualify or be in great health to be a part of the policy , that is the insured 's part of the policy . The owner of the policy , which can be the insured , the beneficiary and even another interested party designates who the beneficiary is .
`` To have life insurance '' usually means that the insured person has a life insurance policy . If that person would die , their beneficiary would receive the face amount of the life insurance policy . Sometimes another person owns the policy , and chooses the beneficiary . But when people talk about having life insurance , they usually are referring to the person who is insured , and for whom the death benefit would be paid , if they would pass away .
Creditors can not go after the life insurance payout to pay the debts of the deceased insured person , as long as the beneficiary or beneficiaries who are receiving the life insurance proceeds are actual people . Life insurance bypasses probate , so the creditor does not have the opportunity to access the life insurance payout . If the beneficiary is the insured person 's estate , the creditors may be able to go after the life insurance death benefit to pay the debts of the insured . If the beneficiary is the one who has the debts , then the creditors can go after the life insurance payout . This is also true if the beneficiary shared a debt with the deceased .
Life insurance policy ownership is the state of owning a life insurance policy . The owner of the policy usually instigates the contract . The owner may insure themselves , and choose another person as beneficiary , or they may insure someone else with whom they have an insurable interest , in which case they usually name themselves beneficiary . The owner can change beneficiary , policy features , or even cancel the policy at will .
Life insurance pays a death benefit to the beneficiary named in the policy . The amount is usually income tax free to the beneficiary . The amount can be used by the beneficiary as they choose . In recent years , accelerated benefit riders -LRB- ABR -RRB- have been developed to accelerate , during the final stages of life , some of the death benefit amount in the event the life insured becomes terminally ill . This emerged in response to a need to access cash for the high cost of medical care near the end of life . If available , there is usually no cost to ABR to the policy . Not all life insurance policies have ABRs but many newly issued policies do . Some ABRs also cover chronic illnesses or long term care . The policy owner would need to consult the policy for claim terms , contact their agent or call the life insurance company to learn more .
Contingent means conditional . In life insurance , you can choose a contingent beneficiary or owner for your policy on the condition that the primary beneficiary or owner dies . If no contingent beneficiary is named and the primary beneficiary or beneficiaries die , the insured 's estate usually becomes the policy 's automatic contingent beneficiary .
To be the beneficiary of a life insurance policy means that you would receive the life insurance proceeds if the insured person passed away . Primary beneficiaries are the person or persons who are `` first in line '' for the death benefit . The policy owner picks the beneficiaries , and if there are more than one , the policy owner determines what percent goes to each person . If there are two primary beneficiaries and one dies before the insured person dies , the other primary beneficiary gets the entire death benefit . Contingent beneficiaries can be named in case none of the primary beneficiaries are longer alive when the insured person passes .
When a person or persons is named as beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the death benefit usually passes to the beneficiary outside of probate and the will does not affect the policy at all . If there was a contradiction in the will with who the life insurance policy stated to receive the death benefit , the policy usually overrides the will .
The Primary Beneficiary of a life insurance policy is the person first designated by the Owner of the policy to receive the death benefit if the Insured person passes . The Primary Beneficiary may be one or more persons , or it may be a trust or other entity . If the Primary Beneficiary is one person , he/she gets 100 % of the death benefit . If more than one beneficiary is noted , the death benefit may be split equally , or the policy may assign different percentages to go to each beneficiary . Most policies list a Contingent Beneficiary -LRB- or more than one , as described above -RRB- as well . If all the Primary Beneficiaries are deceased , the death benefit would go to the Contingent Beneficiaries in the manner noted by the policy . It is important to review life insurance policies regularly to make sure that the beneficiaries noted are up to date and that the death benefit goes to the person or persons intended .
Not usually . As long as the policy has a named beneficiary who is alive when the insured dies the proceeds will normally skip the probate process . If there are no living beneficiaries when the insured dies , then the proceeds are paid to the insured 's estate at which time the funds would need to go through the probate process in order to be distributed to heirs . Keep in mind that proceeds paid to a deceased beneficiary could end up in that beneficiary 's estate and would need to go through the probate process in order for that beneficiary 's heirs to receive the proceeds .
Great question ! Insurance policies have three moving parts . The owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The owner holds the right to changing the beneficiary ; The insured is the person that the policy is taken out on ; and the beneficiary is the person who gets paid when you -LRB- the insured -RRB- pass . Do you know who was listed as the beneficiary ? That 's what you really need to know . My understanding of the 50/50 law in your state as explained by a couple of lawyers , does n't mean all debts or assets are necessarily split 50/50 . I 'd advise strongly that you ask the agent or company who holds the policy who they award the ownership to , and your lawyer . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Care Insurance Subject To ERISA ?
Yes , Group Long Term Care Insurance is subject to ERISA , the Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . As Baby Boomers age and more long term care policies are being used , ERISA will come into play more and more in deciding what is a legitimate long term care claim .
Yes , Group Long Term Care Insurance is subject to ERISA , the Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . As Baby Boomers age and more long term care policies are being used , ERISA will come into play more and more in deciding what is a legitimate long term care claim .
Yes , group Life Insurance plans are subject to ERISA , the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . Group life insurance is a wonderful benefit , but it is often a good idea to have an individual policy along with your group policy . That way you can be sure to have it for as long as you need it , and it will not be subject to ERISA .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
ERISA jurisdiction covers qualified plans . It is conceivable that life insurance could be part of the contribution to a qualified plan with certain product limitations -LRB- while life 49.5 % , universal life 25 % -RRB- . The economic benefit of the insurance portion is subject to taxation as an additional item beyond the cash values . But beyond that ERISA has no jurisdiction over life insurance .
There are two types of retirement categories : ERISA sanctioned qualified plans and non ERISA , non-qualified plans . ERISA plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 412 -LRB- i -RRB- allow tax deduction able contributions , tax deferred accumulations and taxable distributions . Non ERISA non-qualified plans have no tax deductibility , but have tax deferred accumulations . The distributions depend on the product line . Annuities gains are taxed as ordinary income and TAMRA compliant permanent life insurance can generate tax free income providing the contract is just in force for the life of the inured .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Life Insurance is not governed by ERISA unless it is provided by a non-government or non-exempted employer in a group benefit plan . ERISA does not govern privately held life insurance policies by individuals who purchased them , and ERISA does not oversee the benefits paid to someone with an individual plan purchases outside of work .
Life insurance is not an ERISA plan . However , life insurance purchased in a pension plan has ERISA implications . ERISA is a federal law which dates back to 1974 that sets minimum standards for retirement plans in the private sector . The protections provided to plan participants are extensive . To the extent that retirement plans utilize life insurance and related products as plan assets , the standards and protections can indirectly apply to such products . For example , there are specific rules for qualified retirement plans which place limits on life insurance as a plan asset .
The Employee Retirement Security Income Act -LRB- ERISA -RRB- governs many health insurance plans but not all . Most employer sponsored health plans are covered by ERISA expect those provided by government employers , religious organizations , and plans set up solely to comply with specific sate laws . Any plan purchased on the individual market , such as plans offered through an Affordable Care Act state exchange are not subject to ERISA .
It used to mean that for an individual applying for individual health insurance or for an employer group applying for group health insurance that the individual or the employees would have to answer medical questions and perhaps provide rather detailed information on any pre-existing health conditions that they or their dependents to be covered might have . This has essentially become a non-issue in the fully insured individual or group health insurance markets after January 1 , 2o14 as the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- no longer allows for the underwriting of such health insurance policies . Underwriting may still be encountered in the group health insurance market if an employer has or is implementing a self-funded health insurance plan . As these plans are subject to the Federal ERISA guidelines asking medical questions and adjusting a group 's rates for the medical risk -LRB- s -RRB- in the group is still allowed .
In the land of Long-term Care Insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- , the word `` group '' roughly means `` guaranteed issue '' . Guaranteed issue means that all one has to do is apply and coverage will be issued - no formal underwriting . It takes a pretty big group for an insurance company to take on the risk of true group LTCi . I do n't believe any carriers provide it anymore , although much of it was sold previously and is still in force . Some carriers will still write `` simplified issue '' group wherein the applicant must answer 4 or 5 questions in the negative to qualify . If they answer `` yes '' to any of the questions , the insurance company may still consider them , but only if they authorize the insurance company to look at their medical records and maybe call them for an underwriting interview over the phone . Only a few carriers are still in this market segment of LTCi , however . Carriers will provide a small discount of 5 % or so to smaller numbers of applicants that are successfully underwritten and all work for the same employer . The minimum number depends on the carrier , but it is usually a minimum of 5 - 7 FTE . This is called `` multi-life '' long-term care insurance and is not true group . But , people refer to it that way.Multi-life underwriting may be `` simplified '' , or `` modified - simplified '' . Regardless , some underwriting does take place and a person may not qualify medically . In the past , if enough people in a multi-life situation qualified for coverage , a carrier would accept one person who did n't qualify medically and issue a base contract of coverage to that person . That accommodation is not actively marketed these days and may only be available under special conditions . With a multi-life policy , the insured owns his/her own policy and can take it with them when they leave employment . The discounted premium is portable , too.Multi-life may be worth looking into if the company only wants to insure executives , owners or key occupation classes . LTCi is not yet subject to ERISA rules , so companies can `` carve out '' who they want to provide this kind of insurance to . Payment of premiums by the corporation -LRB- especially C-corps -RRB- may qualify as a health insurance expense and deductible for tax purposes , as well . But , before assuming any special treatment of premium payments , one should consult with a qualified tax professional.Otherwise , there is no true group LTCi and fewer `` deals '' any more for LTCi .
It is possible . Check your plan document if you are unsure . ERISA plans are typically self funded single employer plans but can also include MET or MEWA plans and Taft-Hartley plans . ERISA plans are not subject to state laws and mandates and are not covered under state guaranty funds . ERISA plans are governed by the DOL and IRS .
Group life insurance is life insurance provided through your place of employment . Your employer might pay the premium , or you might pay the premium , or a combination of the two . Life insurance is subject to ERISA and there are tax consequences for amounts beyond $ 50,000 . Sometimes you can take the policy with you -LRB- it is portable -RRB- , and sometimes your life insurance ends when your employment ends . It is a good idea to have a privately owned policy in addition to group life insurance , as you never know if you will be able to qualify for one in the future .
Qualified retirement plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s -LRB- under ERISA -RRB- may use tax deferred annuities as a funding product . Using tax deferred annuities in a qualified plan subjects the annuity to the rules of RMD distribution and the re-characterization of basis as taxable as ordinary income at the plan participants effective tax bracket rate .
An individual IRA retirement plan is a qualified defined contribution under ERISA , the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . The plan allows tax deductible contributions up to $ 5,500 for 2013 and an addition $ 1,000 under the catch up provision for those over age 50 . An IRA accumulates tax deferred and upon distributions is taxable as ordinary income . Keep in mind that distributions before age 59 will also be subject to a 10 % penalty .
Loan provisions under a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- plan are subject to the plan approved by your employer . That plan must comply with ERISA , a federal regulation . The decision as to when you can borrow against your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- has been made by your employer and that includes the conditions under which a loan will be allowed . There is also a vesting schedule if the employer is contributing to the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . Check with your HR representative .
An ESOP -LRB- employee stock ownership plan -RRB- can be either qualified or non-qualified . Essentially each plan is funded with employer stock but beyond that there are differences . A non-qualified ESOP is not subject to ERISA and they do not have the same tax favored benefits as a qualified ESOP . Non-qualified ESOPs have a risk of forfeiture and can be used in a golden handcuffs arrangement .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Does A Doctor Visit Cost Without Health Insurance ?
The cost will vary from doctor to doctor and will depend upon the nature of the office visit and the services rendered . If you are going to be paying cash then many doctor 's offices are quite happy to work with you on that basis as it saves them the time and expense of filing an insurance claim . So , they may offer an attractive cash rate . Unfortunately , there really is no uniform pricing system for all health care services that is adhered to uniformly by all physicians . It 's not like going to Midas to get your oil changed . I would advise you to call around to several doctor 's offices , speak with the office manager and explain what you think you are wanting to see the doctor for and that you are wanting to pay in cash and ask them if they can provide an estimate . Some probably will and you may be surprised by how many do n't know how to deal with that question . You can also try to go online and do some research for average costs for various types of office visits and medical tests and procedures . This may give you some advance knowledge of what average costs -LRB- or at least the range of costs -RRB- are in your area so that you can know if you are being offered a fair price or to use for negotiating purposes . An online service like `` HealthCost Estimator.com '' may also help you in doing your research . Finally , for simple procedures and tests there are a growing number of stand alone walk-in clinics or ones housed in pharmacies that do actually have a posted price list for the limited range of services they provide . For many simple needs this kind of setting may serve your needs .
Medicare covers a preventive screening visit when you 're new to Medicare and yearly `` wellness '' visits . A full annual physical exam would not be covered at 100 % . The new to Medicare preventive visit can be completed one time within the first year your Part B is active and includes a review of your medical history , discussion about preventive services -LRB- e.g. certain screenings , shots , etc. -RRB- , ht/wt measurement , blood pressure check , vision test , and a BMI index check . The yearly `` wellness '' visits can be completed once every 12 months if you 've had Part B for longer than a year . The purpose of the wellness visits is to develop and monitor a plan to help prevent disease and disability based on your health . Your would complete a health risk assessment with your doctor as well . Like the welcome to Medicare preventive visit , these visits include a review of your medical history , ht/wt check , and a blood pressure check . These test are only covered at 100 % if you 're doctor accepts Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . Otherwise , you would be responsible for a portion of the costs -LRB- typically 20 % coinsurance -RRB- and the Part B deductible may apply -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . You can also be subject to paying for other services that are conducted during the visit if they are not covered as part of the preventive visit benefits -LRB- e.g. blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- . Typically , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only covers about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . You may want to look at supplementing your coverage with a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare supplement plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of more assistance . Thanks very much .
If you are referring to true major medical insurance policies that are in compliance with the requirements of the health care reform law then the answer to your question is `` Yes '' . Now , how the particular health insurance policy you select actually covers doctor 's office visits will vary between both insurance plans offered by an insurance carrier and from one insurance carrier to another . You could have a plan with office visit copayments that apply immediately , office visits could be covered at the plan 's co-insurance level with no deductible applying , or all health care services , including doctor 's office visits , could be subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , the consumer 's experience could range from a copay of perhaps $ 20 for the office visit to paying 100 % of the costs if it is subject to the plan 's deductible . The bottom line is to do your homework and study the coverage details of the health insurance plan you are enrolling in . There is much more to consider about a health insurance policy than just its monthly premium cost .
Private health insurance plans do indeed cover GP -LRB- General Practitioner -RRB- office visits . Some health insurance plans have in network copay 's for doctor visits -LRB- and higher copay 's for out of network visits -RRB- . If your plan does not have a doctor visit copay you will pay the negotiated rate when you use a network doctor . Your out of pocket cost for using a non-network doctor will be considerably higher .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The cost will vary from doctor to doctor and will depend upon the nature of the office visit and the services rendered . If you are going to be paying cash then many doctor 's offices are quite happy to work with you on that basis as it saves them the time and expense of filing an insurance claim . So , they may offer an attractive cash rate . Unfortunately , there really is no uniform pricing system for all health care services that is adhered to uniformly by all physicians . It 's not like going to Midas to get your oil changed . I would advise you to call around to several doctor 's offices , speak with the office manager and explain what you think you are wanting to see the doctor for and that you are wanting to pay in cash and ask them if they can provide an estimate . Some probably will and you may be surprised by how many do n't know how to deal with that question . You can also try to go online and do some research for average costs for various types of office visits and medical tests and procedures . This may give you some advance knowledge of what average costs -LRB- or at least the range of costs -RRB- are in your area so that you can know if you are being offered a fair price or to use for negotiating purposes . An online service like `` HealthCost Estimator.com '' may also help you in doing your research . Finally , for simple procedures and tests there are a growing number of stand alone walk-in clinics or ones housed in pharmacies that do actually have a posted price list for the limited range of services they provide . For many simple needs this kind of setting may serve your needs .
In the first 12 months that you have part B , you can get a Welcome to Medicare preventive visit at no cost to you providing the provider accepts Medicare assignments , be sure you tell the doctors office that you want to schedule your Welcome to Medicare Preventive visit . You can also receive an annual Wellness visit to develop or update your personal health history . However , these visits are not as thorough as the Welcome to Medicare visit . Here again , you pay nothing for the yearly Wellness visit if the doctor or provider accepts Medicare assignments .
Of course you can , it 's called paying for it yourself . And actually that 's how most Americans paid for their health care -LRB- such as it was -RRB- for most of our nation 's history . Of course today most Americans have grown up in an environment where all of their health care financing has been funneled through a third party such as a health insurance company or a government program and have been disconnected from the concept of directly paying for health care services . Many would argue this is one of the underlying causes of the problems our nation is experiencing with health care costs today . Your doctor would be thrilled to be paid in cash , check or credit card for your office visit and not have to file a claim with an insurance carrier or government agency . In fact , you might find out you would get a discounted charge for paying in cash . An example of this is the growing `` concierge medical practice '' movement where people prepay their physician a fee for access to the doctor 's services . You get your phone calls returned promptly and when you go in to see your doctor he actually spends more than 5 to 10-minutes with you . What a revolutionary idea ! The hospital ca n't turn you away when you have an emergency and must deliver care . However , this does n't relieve you of the financial responsibility for the services you receive and they will bill you and pursue payment . This is obviously the area where the greatest concern for individual health financial risk management comes up . Unless you are very wealthy , self-financing several years of cancer treatment or paying for a heart transplant is out of the question for most people . Even managing a chronic health problem like diabetes , COPD , or psoriatic arthritis can have the person using medications costing hundreds or thousands of dollars per month . So , yes , you can still get medical treatment without health insurance and for many routine health care needs self-financing would probably be more cost effective . However , for the high risk and chronic health conditions a person may be faced with insurance is really a necessity .
Less and less , just ask your doctor . Medicare pays on a fee scheduled basis and the reimbursement level varies based upon the type of doctor 's visit you are having and the services that are rendered . As such , there is no one flat amount that the doctor gets paid for any and all office visits . What is pretty consistent is that your doctor is almost certainly getting paid less to see a Medicare patient than they are getting paid to provide the same office visit service to a person covered under private health insurance . This is why you are seeing a steady shrinkage in the number of doctors who accept Medicare patients or who will take on any additional Medicare patients .
There are many factors that can contribute to the cost of your insurance . First , there is the type of plan that you choose . A more basic plan that covers only emergency or sickness will cost less on your monthly premiums , but will most likely not cover wellness visits . A more comprehensive plan that covers various wellness visits and tests will be more expensive on your monthly premium , but may save you money in the long run due finding health problems before a catastrophic illness . Other contributing factors are age , lifestyle and previous medical conditions . A person who is in decent health at average height and weight will pay less than someone who is overweight , uses tobacco and has a preexisting medical condition . Options that you choose for your medical plan can also raise or lower your premium . Going with a low annual deductible will cause your monthly premium be higher versus going with a higher deductible . If you are relatively healthy and are comfortable with having a higher out-of-pocket cost will save on the premium . Of course , if you do end up needing to go to the doctor or having a test done , you may end up paying more due to the deductible . Also , having a doctor visit copay option on your plan may make going to the doctor easier to pay , but that option will add to your premium . Health insurance can be a confusing thing to purchase . By doing your research and contacting an agent , it can be a little less confusing and help save you and your family from a financial crisis .
PFFS stands for Private Fee For Service . A Private Fee For Service plan is a type of Medicare Advantage plan under Part C of Medicare . This type of plan is sold through private insurance companies . The plan determines how much it will pay doctors and hospitals at the time of the care . You will need to present your plan ID card every time you go for a doctor or hospital visit . The doctor 's office/hospital has to agree to the plan 's terms and conditions on each visit - they reserve the right to accept it one time and then refuse it another . In the event of an emergency , doctors and hospitals must treat you .
That is a great question ! Thanks to the Affordable care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , there are now exchanges where you can look at several policies to compare them . Even so , they can still be confusing . How do you know what to look for ? I 'd ask you to contact one of the advisers available on the site , or a qualified agent to help find the right policy for you , but here are some simple things that you can look at to get an idea . -LRB- I have simplified this greatly -RRB- The OUT OF POCKET COST - this is what it will cost you to get your service , Doctor visit , or service . The out of pocket is determined by your DEDUCTIBLE -LRB- the amount that you pay before the insurance company pays - a high deductible plan will cost less in monthly premiums , but more when you need medical help -RRB- , your CO-PAY , -LRB- the amount that is charged to you for the service rendered . Typically , the lower your out of pocket , the higher your monthly premium will be . If you/your family are healthy people with few prescriptions or medical needs , a high deductible plan with a low monthly cost might make sense . The PREMIUM - this is the monthly cost of the policy that you will pay to the insurance company for the coverage the policy will provide . The COVERAGE - what the policy will allow for services , Doctors , and prescriptions . Here 's where an adviser can be really helpful . You want the policy that covers the most things for the least cost , while allowing you the most freedom over who to use as the provider of the services . If you have a medical need that requires frequent services , and you 've had the same Doctors for awhile , you 'd want to be sure that the policy allows that doctor to continue being your Doctor -LRB- They call this in-network , or out-of-network and charge accordingly -RRB- , and that his/her office accepts that insurance . This is a greatly simplified overview , and I would still advise that you have someone help you when you are choosing , but this hopefully gives you a better idea of how to get started . Thanks for asking !
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Health insurance can trace its roots back to the 1920 's in the US . The first health insurance was introduced inTexas to offset the costs of hospital stays . Blue Cross was founded specifically for this purpose . Several years later , Blue Shield was added to help offset doctor 's charges . As technological advances in the medical field particularly after WWII , costs rose rapidly . The idea of managed care was advanced with the purpose that if people would regularly schedule appointments to doctors , they could determine high risks much faster and avoid large hospital costs . In the 1970 's , the HMO -LRB- Health Maintenance Org -RRB- gained favor and under President Nixon a bill was passed that would require employers with greater than 25 employees to offer coverage through an HMO . By the early 1990 's , the demand for the flexibility of a traditional plans in addition to the cost saving of the HMO plans , brought us the PPO and the POS . Doctor Office Visit copays and prescription drug copays became the norm . The number of laws governing healthcare and what policies were required to pay increased nearly 1000 % . Technological advances were happening at a `` break-neck '' pace . With each law requiring more health issues to be covered and the advances in technology , ultimatelycaused premiums to increase dramatically . In 1993 , in TN , a $ 1000 deductible for a 35 year old male was $ 41 per month . How things have changed ! The government 's answer was to fix the financing mechanism , concluding that they could control costs by forcing the financing -LRB- aka insurance companies -RRB- to follow strict regulations . Sounds great except : - insurance companies were required to minimize the amounts they paid doctors , hospitals , etc -LRB- providers -RRB- ; while providers were having to serve twice as many patients for the same money and go into $ 100k plus in debt just to get through med school . Can you say train wreck?Which brings us to where we are today ! That maybe a bit more than you asked in questioning the original purpose of health insurance , which in simple terms , was set up to exchange premium for the possibility of an expensive hospital stay in the future .
The Part B Excess Charge is the amount above what Medicare approves for a procedure or office visit . Providers can bill you for excess charges if they do not accept Medicare Assignment . Because the doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she is able to charge an additional amountthis is the Part B Excess Charge . The doctor , however , is limited to charging 15 % over the Medicare approved amount . To avoid excess charges it is important to understand Medicare Assignment . This term refers to providers who WILL accept full payment by Medicare . If a doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she IS allowed to bill you for Part B Excess Charges . To find out if your doctor accepts Medicare Assignment you can always call their office or visit Medicare.gov and locate the physician information . If you do n't like the idea of paying Part B excess charges , you can consider purchasing a Medicare Supplement plan to cover that expense . In 2014 , there are two plans -LRB- F , G -RRB- that have that benefit . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Purpose Of Life Insurance ?
The original purpose of Life Insurance - the reason it was created is to transfer the risk of a person dying too soon from that person and their loved ones to the insurance company . Generally if a person dies while still having debt or not having enough money to care for their heirs , that person has `` died too soon '' . In a lot of people 's opinions dying at any time is too soon ! But that 's a philosophical consideration . Over time Permanent Life Insurance has come to play an important part in the financial well-being of insureds while living . Term insurance on the other hand remains solely for the purpose of insuring against a person dying too soon . Peggy listed a number of uses for Permanent Life Insurance , and I would add that the cash value of whole life insurance is a terrific asset for use in personal banking applications . For more information see WEBSITELINK
This is an age old question . The purpose is the need you are needing to fill . Remember the death benefit is a tax-free benefit which provides the financial resources to provide for many needs . From the simple , protecting your family from lost income , preserving your way of life to protecting a company from the loss of a business owner or key employee . Peggy and Dave list out great reasons defining the purpose of Life Insurance .
Life insurance demonstrates that you love someone else . If your death is going to have an impact on someone you love , then life insurance can help -LRB- perhaps a great deal . -RRB- Sometimes life insurance is required to protect the interest of a lender or a contract holder -LRB- who you might not love . -RRB- In the end , though , most life insurance is purchased because people love each someone else .
If you fill out a life insurance application , it will ask that very question : `` What is the purpose for your life insurance policy ? '' That is because the purpose varies from person to person . Some purposes for which people buy life insurance are : 1 -RRB- To replace their income that would be lost upon their death . 2 -RRB- To hire others to replace their contributions to the family that would be lost upon their death -LRB- daycare , transportation , cleaning services , lawn services , etc -RRB- 3 -RRB- To give a business time and resources to replace an employee when a key employee dies . 4 -RRB- To pass their estate to their heirs in a tax friendly fashion . 5 -RRB- To pay taxes , administrative fees , and debts upon their death . 6 -RRB- To pay for chronic , critical or terminal illness expenses -LRB- when the policy has living benefits -RRB- 7 -RRB- To pay off mortgage , school loans , business loans , and other debts . 8 -RRB- To pay for all final expenses , including funeral , memorial service , burial , transportation , etc. 9 -RRB- To leave a gift to charity . 10 -RRB- To provide cash value for retirement .
What is the primary purpose of life insurance ? What everthe policy owner wants it to be . Every purpose can be different . While dating myself a little bit by saying this . . Life insurance is the silly putty of financial products . It is a product that has many forms and can be used in many ways . One person 's primary purpose may be someone else 's 5th choice . It 's not unheard of to start a first time client meeting with the question `` what do you want your life insurance to do ? ''
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
The main purpose of life insurance is to protect your family or business from the costs associated with your death . When a funeral causes relatives to have to pool their resources to pay for it , that is a purpose where life insurance could have helped . When a business must be sold to an outside party because a relative can not afford to buy it , that is a purpose where life insurance could have helped . When a family must go on welfare because the breadwinner passed away , that is a purposed where life insurance could have helped .
These are two very different products that serve 2 different purposes so it ca n't be said whether one is better than the other . 401k 's are generally funded to be used for retirement savings purposes that can be accessed during your senior/retirement years . During your working life , many employers will offer to match all or a portion of the funds you place into your 401k -LRB- varying on a number of factors -RRB- . The intended purposes of whole life insurance are to create large sums of money quickly in the event the insured dies . It 's typically used as a form of protection to pay off debts -LRB- so your family is not burdened with those expenses -RRB- , provide income to a surviving spouse , leave a legacy to the insured 's loved ones , etc. . While whole life insurance does build cash value that you can borrow against , it 's actually creating a loan against the policy and is expected to be paid back -LRB- interest would be charged like you would have on a loan from a bank -RRB- . Cashing out a policy can be done , but you lose the protection of the life insurance and you may be subject to surrender charges and/or taxes on any gains -LRB- cash value amount is higher than total premiums paid into the policy -RRB- . When you buy life insurance , you 're buying it for the purposes of the death benefit protection - it 's not typically considered/used as an investment/retirement savings vehicle .
The purpose of insurance , in general , is to provide economic protection against losses that may be incurred due to a chance happening or event . An insurance policy provides this protection by accumulating funds to meet those uncertain losses . Human life value , which is what Life insurance protects , is what a person would earn , or what it would cost to replace the services of that person , in the future . The primary purpose of life insurance is to conserve and protect human life value so that others will not be too negatively affected economically in the event of the insured person 's death .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
There is actually not a type of life insurance call Viatical Life Insurance , but life insurance is purchased from the policy owner as part of a `` viatical settlement '' , or `` life settlement '' . In order to sell one 's policy as part of a viatical settlement , the policy must have cash value and the insured person must have a decreased life expectancy . The purpose is to provide the insured with cash while still alive , while the entities who are buying the policy are banking on making more from the death benefit than what they paid for the policy . Most new cash value policies now ask whether the policy is being taken out for the purpose of being sold , because this defeats and misrepresents the purpose of life insurance . For those with existing policies who find themselves with a severe or terminal illness , and insurance rich and cash poor , a viatical might be a benefit . But you must be very careful and look at every angle before going down that road .
There is no way to say what life insurance will cost for any one person . Good life insurance is a policy that has some guarantees , is with a good company , and accomplishes the purposes for which you are purchasing it . To find what the cost of good life insurance for you , you 'd need to contact an agency that will help you discern your purposes for your policy , then find your best rate from a good life insurance company .
What does life insurance do ? That is a great question . Auto insurance pays to repair your car , home insurance pays to repair your home , health insurance pays to repair your health . But life insurance does not pay to repair your life . Rather , life insurance pays when death occurs . It 's purpose is to `` repair '' some of the financial damage that is incurred upon the death of a loved one and/or provider . That is not all life insurance does - there are many reasons that people purchase life insurance . But it is the basic purpose .
Ironically , the purpose of a disclosure statement in life insurance policies is , partly , to describe the purpose and importance of the disclosure . The disclosure statement will state what the policy is intended to do , and what the policyholder 's responsibilities are . It will outline the coverage , cost , personal information of the insured , source of the insurance , and certification and maintenance of the policy .
How long one needs life insurance depends upon the purpose of the life insurance . If the purpose is to cover a 5 year bank loan , then you need it for 5 years . If the purpose is to pay estate taxes , then you need it to last until the 2nd spouse has passed away . If you need it until your mortgage is paid off , then you need it for that number of years , etc. , etc. . Point is , first define the need , then it 's easy to figure the length of time .
Insurable interest is what ensures that someone can not take a life insurance policy on you with the purpose of making money on your death . It is insurance fraud to take out a policy on an older or terminally ill person just to collect money on their death ; or even worse , to kill someone for the purpose of collecting their life insurance . In order to prevent fraud and to protect their policyholders , all life insurance policies use some measure of insurable interest .
If you fill out a life insurance application , it will ask that very question : `` What is the purpose for your life insurance policy ? '' That is because the purpose varies from person to person . Some purposes for which people buy life insurance are : 1 -RRB- To replace their income that would be lost upon their death . 2 -RRB- To hire others to replace their contributions to the family that would be lost upon their death -LRB- daycare , transportation , cleaning services , lawn services , etc -RRB- 3 -RRB- To give a business time and resources to replace an employee when a key employee dies . 4 -RRB- To pass their estate to their heirs in a tax friendly fashion . 5 -RRB- To pay taxes , administrative fees , and debts upon their death . 6 -RRB- To pay for chronic , critical or terminal illness expenses -LRB- when the policy has living benefits -RRB- 7 -RRB- To pay off mortgage , school loans , business loans , and other debts . 8 -RRB- To pay for all final expenses , including funeral , memorial service , burial , transportation , etc. 9 -RRB- To leave a gift to charity . 10 -RRB- To provide cash value for retirement .
What is not covered under term life insurance ? Well , the same things that are covered under Universal Life and Whole life are covered by term . . It is just term is a single purpose policy . That is a term policy pays a death benefit , while both Universal and Whole life can have other purposes .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
Whole life policies are well suited for needs that do not diminish over time . Some commonly found uses for whole life are : Family protection : To provide funds to support a surviving spouse and/or minor children , particularly for individuals who start a family later in life ; to pay final bills , such as medical or other estate expenses and federal and state death taxes . Business planning : Whole life insurance is often used for many different business purposes , such as insuring key employees , in split-dollar insurance arrangements , and funding non-qualified deferred compensation plans . Business continuation planning often involves using whole life insurance as a source of funds for buy-sell agreements . Accumulation needs : Some individuals will use the cash value feature of whole life as a way of accumulating funds for specific purposes , such as funding college education , or as a supplemental source of retirement income . Charitable gifts : To provide funds for a gift to charity . Whole life insurance , sometimes called permanent insurance , or ordinary life , is designed to stay in force throughout ones lifetime . As long as the policy owner meets his or her obligations under the policy , the policy remains in force , regardless of any changes in health that may occur . Unlike term insurance , where premium payments generally increase , as the insured gets older -LRB- the chance of death increases with age -RRB- , premiums for most whole life policies remain level . A portion of each premium payment is set aside to earn interest . Over time , a whole life policy will develop cash values . The accumulated cash values form a reserve which enable the insurer to pay a policys full death benefit , while keeping premiums level . During life , many whole life policies have provisions to borrow a portion of the accumulated cash value . If a policy is terminated without the insured dying , there are various surrender options for the cash value available to a policy owner . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is A Key Employee For 401K ?
A key employee for a 401k generally refers to top heavy rules for a defined benefit plan . If greater than 60 % of the present value of the cumulative accrued benefits of plan assets come from `` key employees '' , the plan is considered to be top heavy . A key employee is an employee that at any time during the year was 1 -RRB- someone who owned more than 5 % , 2 -RRB- a more than 1 % owner who was paid $ 150,000 or more or 3 -RRB- an officer that was compensated at more than $ 170,000 for 2014 . The IRS has a long list of guidelines -LRB- IRS 4.72.5 -RRB- for top-heavy plans and it is best to consult with someone who specializes in this area .
A key employee for a 401k generally refers to top heavy rules for a defined benefit plan . If greater than 60 % of the present value of the cumulative accrued benefits of plan assets come from `` key employees '' , the plan is considered to be top heavy . A key employee is an employee that at any time during the year was 1 -RRB- someone who owned more than 5 % , 2 -RRB- a more than 1 % owner who was paid $ 150,000 or more or 3 -RRB- an officer that was compensated at more than $ 170,000 for 2014 . The IRS has a long list of guidelines -LRB- IRS 4.72.5 -RRB- for top-heavy plans and it is best to consult with someone who specializes in this area .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
The correct plan for your business is determined by a number of factors . Here are some of them ; How many employees in the business ? How many employees are family ? Is the business profitable and do employees earn a good living ? Do the owners want a maximum contribution plan for themselves . Are there key employees besides the owners ? How old is the ownership and the employee population ? And there are more questions ; How profitable is the company and how long has it been profitable ? And so on . So whether you put in place a 401k , profit sharing plan or defined benefit plan , these questions need to be answered .
The simple answer is `` Yes ! '' Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is ethical . However , in recent years , because of some of the abuses , it has become more scrutinized in its uses . There are many valid reasons for using COLI . It could be very important to a company if a key person in their company died . In some cases , it would take months or years to replace that person with a specific skill set ; so COLI maybe purchased to offset the loss . It may also be used as `` golden handcuffs '' , where the life insurance builds cash value for a future date to pay executive retirement beyond a 401k . This can be done formally , through legal documents -LRB- the IRS even identifies it by code number much like `` 401k '' -RRB- . The unethical part came into play when companies purchased life insurance of people where they had no insurable interest -LRB- in other words would not be at risk of significant loss by the death of the person insured under the policy -RRB- . For example , CompanyZ purchased COLI on all of its 22,000 employees - from executives done to the maintenance.When a rank-in-file employee died , Company Z kept the death benefit , giving them a tax free benefit . The courts decided that Company Z did not have an insurable interest and required them to pay the family the death benefit . The policy was clearly determined not to be COLI but to be STOLI -LRB- Stranger Owned Life Insurance -RRB- .
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
Can a part time employee qualify for a 401k ? Going to depend entirely on the employer as the IRS spells out the guidelines as to what an employer ca n't do , they leave a lot of room for an employer to decide what they can do . That said , it would be an exceptional employer who would offer 401k benefits to a part time employee as there is a cost per head to the employer for offering a 401k .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
Key man life insurance is for an employee in a business or organization whose loss would put a financial strain on that business or group . Some types of persons who should own key person insurance are top sales people , people who have much knowledge based on years of experience , managers of lots of employees , and/or key decision makers . All these positions take time to develop and to find the right person to replace that key employee . The key man insurance provides money to do the recruiting and operation while the key person is being replaced and trained .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
Key Life Insurance , often called Key Man or Key Person Life Insurance , is a policy that is taken out on a `` key '' employee of a business . The business usually pays for the policy and receives the benefits so that it has the funds to look for a new employee and not suffer financially in the interim , if that key employee should pass .
The death of a key employee or shareholder most often would affect the profits , financial strength and stability of the company . Creditors , customers , employees and suppliers could lose confidence in the business at the death of a key person , especially , if the key person is the owner . Key person life insurance is insurance , purchased by the business to deliver cash at death to provide solutions such as the loss of a key employee and for the funding of buy sell agreements between shareholders . In Canada , when a company owns and is beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the death benefit is received tax free . The funds can then be used by the company for its purposes . The death benefit less the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -LRB- NCPI -RRB- can be paid out as a tax free dividend to surviving shareholders . With careful planning , the key person protection can be designed to also provide executive benefits . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
With Key Person disability insurance , if a vital employee becomes disabled , the business will receive disability income to cover the financial loss of the missing employee . And if a business has more than one key employee whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then Key Person disability insurance can be purchased for more than one person in the business . Any business that would find it hard to replace a vital employee needs Key Person disability insurance . Much like the saying , if a business puts all its eggs in the basket of one person , it wont be able to sustain itself should that person become disabled .
Key Man DI -LRB- also known as Key Person DI -RRB- is a coverage that would pay benefits to a business to cover the financial loss if a vital employee became disabled due to an illness or injury . Any business that would find it hard to replace an employee , or any business that wouldnt be able to function without a specific employee , needs Key Man DI . And if a company had more than one key person whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then DI can be purchased for more than one Key Man . ''
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
401K plans have been one of the primary ways people who work save for retirement . It is what is known as a qualified plan meaning that it is subject to government enforced rules and regulations regarding how money goes into it , how much can go in , how it comes out and how much at one time . Employers offer these plans and agree to put in a certain amount -LRB- in some cases , not all -RRB- so that an employee can grow their nest egg while working . The funds grow tax deferred -LRB- no taxes due till funds are distributed to employee -RRB- , typically have options as to where you will invest them and traditionally accumulate over time . You can ask your employer about their 401K plan if they offer one . You usually have to work with them for a few months or a year before you beome eligible to join .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
If the employee is a `` key person '' in the business , it can be very costly for a business to lose him/her . The time spent in finding and training a new employee could put the business under . So providing life insurance that pays the business in the event that a key employee passes , can be extremely important . Some businesses provide group life insurance for all their employees . Rather than the death benefit going to the business , it is paid to employee 's family in the event of his/her death . This is a benefit that might draw good employees to apply or stay at a certain business , which is an important part of running a profitable business . It also can be very meaningful to the employee 's family if death occurs .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Do I Need Homeowners Insurance In A Condo ?
Your HOA policy will only cover a portion of your actual risk . HOA 's may cover walls out and sometimes the entire until but what HOA 's do not cover is your personal property , potential loss assessments and your own personal liability which is the biggie . Condo polices are very inexpensive and offer a whole lot of protection . Plus if you obtain your policy from your auto carrier you may receive additional discounts on your auto policy .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
There isnt such a thing as a condo-renters policy . If you own the condo , then you need the condo form of a homeowners policy . If you are renting a unit regardless of how the title to the unit is held , you need a tenants policy -LRB- commonly called a renters policy . -RRB- The Condo form is for the owner of the unit and has similar coverages to as standard homeowners policy except that there isnt coverage for the building . The building is covered by a condominium master policy . The tenants policy covers the possessions of the renter . That form is the same regardless of whether it is a condo or an apartment .
More than likely not . I am not sure which type of association you are referring to : condo versus homeowners . If it is a condo association , then part of your association fees will go towards the master policy . The master policy covers the building from the walls out and common areas . It is rare that association fees will go towards an individual unit condo policy -LRB- HO-6 -RRB- . If it is a homeowners association , then the fees go towards the board , common area maintenance and insurance for the common areas . All home owners are required to purchase their own homeowners policy -LRB- HO-3 -RRB- . I hope this helps .
You might need it if required , but its still a good idea to get it even if not required . When would you be required to get condo insurance ? Sometimes the condo association/HOA requires you to get it when buying the condo . If you had the condo for a while , you will find that you might be required to get it now that you are refinancing your loan through a mortgage company since mortgage guidelines have changed -LRB- which I see a lot -RRB- . Its still a good idea to get it because it provides coverage for your personal items and for the internal items of your property that you improve -LRB- known as betterments . -RRB- It basically fills in the holes and supplements the policy the condo association has on the entire building . Talk to your agent because there are a lot of important reasons to have condo insurance , such as for loss assessment -LRB- commonly found with condos and townhomes -RRB- , losses caused by a neighbor that does NOT have insurance , or losses happening because of your own doing . The insurance only costs $ 100 - $ 400 per year depending on what you need . Protect your investment and get the coverage , even if it isnt required .
Primary difference between Renters Insurance and Condo Insurance is in the ownership of the property . Both policies cover Personal Property , Loss of Use , Medical Payments to Others , and Personal Liability . And both policies allow for additional riders to be attached for specific items such as high value jewelry , gun collections , artwork , and etc. . Where the Condo Insurance is different is in the amount of insurance that can be added to cover Building Property . When you own a Condo , you own everything from the sheetrock in , and the condominium association manages everything from the sheetrock out . So items such as installed dishwashers , ovens , furnaces , and even toilets and showers fall under property owned by the condo owner . Typically renters do not own any of these items , and there is no need or reason to carry insurance for them . Condo policies may also have broader coverage for Additional Coverage areas , such as for Emergency Repair ; Trees , Shrubs , Plants and Lawns , and Separate Structures coverage.When you own a condo , it is important to know and understand what the General Insurance policy the Association holds covers , and how the common areas are classified . For example , what would happen if the association was forced to submit a large assessment on all of the condo owners ? Does the General Policy for the Association cover these instances ? If not , you 'll want a Condo policy that does have this coverage . As always , it is best to speak with a licensed , professional insurance agent who can help you interpret the policy coverage , identify gaps in coverage , and make sure you have protection for everything you might require .
There is a special form of homeowners insurance for condo owners . Most mortgage companies require that you have a condo form policy to protect their interests in the property . Unlike a standard Homeowners policy , the condo form does not cover exterior walls and the grounds as these are covered by an association policy .
Let me add a couple important points to what has been said . The homeowners policy and therefore the condo policy has important liability coverage . Make sure you have sufficient coverage for liability as your exposure is often greater than someone who insures a single family residence . And lastly you do not find many free standing homes with sprinklers as most of the 126 million homes in the US were built before sprinklers became possible in dwelling construction , but many condos . because of size and structure do have sprinkles and many insurance companies give a discount to those policies . Be sure to mention to your agent that your condo building is sprinklered if in fact it is .
No . Homeowners insurance is not covered in your condo association fees . Your condo association fees will likely include coverage for common areas and for insurance to replace damage to your unit , not including upgrades or personal property inside your unit . You will need to secure coverage for additions & betterment -LRB- s -RRB- -LRB- otherwise known as upgrades -RRB- to your unit and for personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- , loss of use coverage and Personal Liability . Be sure to check with your local independent insurance agent and your condo association . Hope this answer helps .
Condo Insurance falls under the `` Homeowners '' Category . You would want a type of policy mostly referred to as an HO6 . It provides protection from the walls in , protection for your contents , and liability coverage . Chances are your mortgage company and even your condo association require this type of policy . Living in this type of community you will want to inquire about your loss assessment coverage , you will definitely want more than the standard coverage , and your condo association may have requirements pertaining to the amount of loss assessment you need on your policy . Contact an independent agent in your state that can advise you further .
The cost of your condo insurance policy is going to depend on many factors . Some of these factors are the age of the condo building , the amount of coverage that you desire , the deductible level that you take , the total number of units within the building , the condo buildings distance from the nearest responding fire department , the condo buildings distance from the nearest fire hydrant , and many other factors . Contact a local agent to discuss the coverage and pricing available in your area .
A condominium requires a special form of homeowners insurance . The title company will require evidence of insurance from the condominium association and from the individual borrowing money for the condo . The structure is the responsibility of the association and the interior is the responsibility of the condo owner .
Condo Insurance can be tricky since often an HOA is involved . What first needs to be determined is what does the HOA actually cover . Does the HOA cover any part of the building . If so then we as agents determine what is already covered and look to fill the gaps . I can tell you that the HOA does not cover your personal liability , loss of use , guest medical and personal property so these coverage 's are needed at the very least . You will want to consult with a local independent agent to help you determine coverage 's needed for your condo policy .
No , Condo Owner 's Insurance is not included in your fees . Generally -LRB- refer to your master association document -RRB- the Association would insure from the wall studs out -LRB- siding , insulation , roof -RRB- and will carry liability to cover the association . You need to insure from the wall studs in . That includes sheetrock , trim , cabinets , carpet , personal property and your own liability risk . Condo insurance is not very expensive since most claims happen on the outside of the building -LRB- wind and hail -RRB- . A specific area to look at is weather or not your heating and cooling equipment is covered by the assocation , or if you need to insure it .
Am I correct in assuming that your use of ` who ' in your question refers to the insurance carrier ? If you purchased the coverage and did not receive evidence of the coverage , binder , or a policy , contact the source of the insurance -LRB- if you know the agent or broker -RRB- and ask for a policy . The declarations page -LRB- s -RRB- should set forth the name of the insurance carrier , the name of the insured -LRB- s -RRB- , and the particulars of the contract . If you did not purchase the coverage , some entity -LRB- like a lender/mortgage holder , homeowners association , Co-op , or Condo association , etc. with an insurable interest -RRB- may have purchased the policy . You can contact this entity and pose your question . In most states a homeowners policy must be in the name of the owner -LRB- showing insurable interest -RRB- and the home must be occupied by the owner -LRB- eligibility requirement for most homeowners policies . -RRB- More details of your situation are needed to provide a more specific answer .
Great Question . Condo Insurance covers you for liability if some one falls in your condo . Also cover you for fire , theft and water damage . You would alos need to have coverage for the inside of your unit for the wall in case of a fire and your unit was damaged . Good Luck
A renters policy is cheaper for the same amount of coverage on personal property . A homeowners covers not only the personal property but the residence itself . That is why it is more expensive . For your information a Condo policy is a combination of a homeowners and tenants because they are not responsible for the grounds and outer walls of the building .
There are policies specifically designed for condo 's . Most condominium associations require insurance and if there is a mortgage your bank will . The major difference is that the condo policy will only cover personal belongings and the interior of the building not covered by the association . The association generally covers the building itself .
If you are talking about your monthly Condo Association fee , then no it is not . The fee that ou pay each month includes the Association 's coverage on the complex 's buildings . As a Condo Unit Owner , you should or may be required to obtain a Condominium Unit Owner 's Insurance policy to protect your interest in the property , your personal belongings and liability exposures . This would be paid separately by you to your insurance company .
There is a specialized form used for condominiums . Lenders require that the condo be insured to protect their interests . The trick is to coordinate the association policy , which covers the building and the condo policy which covers everything inside the external walls . So if a mortgage company loans $ 400,000 on a condominium they want to know that the building will be replace in the event of a covered loss and that the interior of the condominium will also be replaced .
end question
start question
annuities
Will Annuity Rates Improve ?
Annuity Rates will most likely improve over the next 5 years , however , there is no guarantee . Annuity Rates are heavily dependent on the 10 year Treasury along with the Fed Funds Rate . Currently , these are both at historical lows . Annuity Rates are currently at a historical low along with them . Most economists agree that the 10y Treasury & Fed Rates will increase over the next 2-10 years . If this happens , Annuity Rates will increase along with them .
Annuity Rates will most likely improve over the next 5 years , however , there is no guarantee . Annuity Rates are heavily dependent on the 10 year Treasury along with the Fed Funds Rate . Currently , these are both at historical lows . Annuity Rates are currently at a historical low along with them . Most economists agree that the 10y Treasury & Fed Rates will increase over the next 2-10 years . If this happens , Annuity Rates will increase along with them .
Bonus annuities are annuities that pay a bonus to the contract owner generally as an incentive to start the annuity . This bonus is generally paid as bonus to the interest rate in the first year of the annuity . These benefits can greatly improve yield on the cash in the annuity . Some care should be taken when considering these annuities as they often come with recapture charges if the owner cashes in the annuity within a few years from opening it -LRB- i.e. the bonus will be forfeited -RRB- .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Can you negotiate Term Life Insurance ? That is a great question . Many people think that life insurance companies hold sales , and ads can easily give people that impression . But life insurance actually has set rates , and the only negotiable part may -LRB- or may not -RRB- be what you are rated . Most life insurance companies must justify to their reinsurer -LRB- s -RRB- the rating that they give an applicant , which means sticking to underwriting guidelines . That is why you can often get a better rate by shopping with an agency that carries many different companies , because you can take advantage of a variety of underwriting guidelines and find the one that works best for you . Sometimes , when a rating is given , extra information can be provided to the underwriter to convince him/her to improve the rating . Sometimes knowing that another company rated you better can help bump your rating up . These are possibilities that could result in you paying a lower price . But how the life insurance itself is priced is not negotiable .
Can you get life insurance if you have diabetes ? Decades ago the answer was only `` no '' . As treatment for diabetes has improved and the wide range of how well diabetic manage their condition the prospects have changed . Depending on your level of control the possibility of aquiring a policy have improved greatly .
Homeowners insurance will cover any improvements that you make to the home . However you will need to call your agent to discuss the improvements so that they can be documented on your policy . Your policy should always have all the correct characteristics documented so there are no problems in the event of a claim . Also you can discuss any potential discounts that may be available due to the upgrades .
There are three levels of Nursing Care , Skilled , Intermediate , and Custodial . Skilled Nursing care requires that you need the services of a licensed professional and that your health can improve by utilizing those services . For example , physical therapy , occupational therapy , and speech therapy would fall under those categories . Custodial Care means that you are not going to improve . You just need the assistance of others to perform certain activities of daily living . Medicare only pays for Skilled Nursing and is limited to 100 days .
HSIP is intended to improve access to major surgical procedure andto as an incentive for general surgeons to participate within specific time frames . The following is the actual description you get when you Google Medicare HSIP : HSIP was created to improve access to major surgical procedures -LRB- surgical procedures with a 10 day or 90 day global period -RRB- for Medicare patients in a HSPA area . To be eligible for the HSIP incentive , a physician must be enrolled in Medicare as a General Surgeon -LRB- specialty 02 -RRB- . The HSIP incentive is effective for services provided on or after January 1 , 2011 , and before January 1 , 2016 . Incentive payments earned under HSIP will be combined with incentive payments earned under other quarterly incentive programs and issued as a single check .
Coverage A-Dwelling , on your declaration page is the amount of money your home is insured for against covered perils . How much should your limit be ? It should be the amount of money you need to rebuild your house from scratch . That amount of money is called Replacement Cost . How do you determine the Replacement Cost Value ? To determine the Replacement Cost Value , you need to know or measure the square footage of your home . You also need to know the special features of your home , like skylights , central vacuums , etc. . You also need to know the quality of your improvements . For example , are your kitchen and bathroom fixtures Builders Grade or Luxury ? If you can gather that information , call your agent and review it with them . They should be able to help you come up with a reasonable estimate of your homes replacement value . You should revisit the value every three to five years or after you make a significant improvement . You want to keep pace with your homes value , but you dont want to over insurance and waste money . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Best answer : six months old . Hopefully , your parents did this for you . Hopefully , they bought you a nice whole life policy at a ridiculously low premium . A guaranteed premium . For your lifetime . Since it is a lifetime contract , you have lots of time to grow both the cash values and the survivor benefit . They can both grow to enormous numbers if you let them . If your parents did this for you , more power to you . If not , its not too late for you to do this for your children and grandchildren . Next best answer : now . You are single ? It doesnt matter . You dont have any dependents ? It doesnt matter . You dont have any obligations ? It doesnt matter . The price will never be lower than it is now . Even if you are in perfect health , if you wait just two years to make the purchase , the price will be higher simply due to age . Why pay extra ? Whats that ? You have a pre-existing condition and want to wait until it improves or stabilizes ? Not a good idea . What happens if it gets worse ? Then you are out of luck . If you want life insurance , get it . You may end up paying more now . But if your health does improve , then you can re-shop the coverage and replace the current policy with a cheaper one . And if unfortunately you dont get better , then at least you will have a policy in force . To protect your spouse , or pay off the mortgage , or cover your business debt , or for any of the many other reasons you will need life insurance later on .
In general , you can not negotiate life insurance . The rates are set at a certain cost per thousand dollars of coverage , and there is no bargaining allowed to reduce that cost . However , if you are rated higher than you think is fair , you can use an experienced life insurance agent to go to bat for you . You may be able to get a letter from your doctor that helps the underwriter see your health in a better light . You may be able to provide additional medical records or testing to improve your rating . You might possibly even be able to obtain a lower rating from one company on the grounds of what another company rated you .
My advice is to keep your Term policy until the time when premiums go up -LRB- usually , at the end of the term -RRB- . The exception would be if your health improved , you lost a lot of weight , quit smoking , or something else that would allow you to get a better rate on a new policy . Once the rate jumps up and goes into annually renewable term , the price gets so high that it is unsustainable for long . Some situations that might prompt you to keep it for a while is if you are terminally ill or have a very short need for which buying a new policy would be more of a hassle than it is worth . It is far better to convert the policy before the price jumps up and the conversion privilege ends . You will get a lot more for your money to convert it to permanent than pay the annually renewable rates . As far as dropping your Term policy when the need ends , one need usually replaces another , and when that good rate is gone , it is gone . You will be surprised at how much more it will cost you to get that coverage back just due to being older . If you have been diagnosed with a serious health problem in the meantime -LRB- and is n't that why a lot of people seek life insurance , because they have just been faced with their own mortality -RRB- , you may not be able to get a new Term policy at all . So I would give it a lot of thought before dropping any Term policy unless it is to get a better policy at a lower rate , or to switch it to something permanent .
That is a great question ! Unfortunately having bad credit can have an affect on your insurance rate . Many insurance companies look at your credit score and history to `` determine '' your level of trustworthiness and responsibility . The financial world is very interconnected , and having some blemishes on your credit can have effects in all kinds of unexpected ways . The good news ? Often your credit rating is n't as bad as you think . I 'd advise you to get a free copy of your credit report , and look at what you can do to clean it up , and improve it . More good news ? They will look more at your driving record , car , and it 's daily mileage than your credit rating . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Many insurers utilize credit scores when determining the auto insurance rate a customer will pay . The reason is that often , there is a direct correlation and relationship with bad credit and higher incidence of accidents . Although the discount or surcharge may not be large , it is till worthwhile to be aware of your current credit rating and take steps to monitor and improve it .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Insurance underwriters will be underwriting the insured , the property and its characteristics , the available fire protection in your community , and proximity to known hazards . You should be prepared to give your personal information and be able to describe the home , it 's style of construction , it 's age or when built , and the age of heat , AC , electrical system , plumbing and roof along with other typical improvements or major maintenance . Indicate whether you have qualifying alarm systems and other protective devices . It helps to have present coverage info in hand to provide coverage dates for accurate rating . The more you can help answer rating and qualification questions , the better .
Insurance underwriters will be underwriting the insure do , the property and its characteristics , the available fire protection in your community , and proximity to known hazards . You should be prepared to give your personal information and be able to describe the home , it 's style of construction , it 's age or when built , and the age of heat , AC , electrical system , plumbing and roof along with other typical improvements or major maintenance . Indicate whether you have qualifying alarm systems and other protective devices . It helps to have present coverage info in hand to provide coverage dates for accurate rating . The more you can help answer rating and qualification questions , the better .
Insurance companies that issue annuities can go bankrupt . This is an extremely rare event given the regulatory overview that exists in the insurance industry , but it is possible . Insurers are required to hold , at a minimum , two times the amount of capital vs. the amount of anticipated claims they could incur in any given year . Any insurer who falls near or below this level is subject to serious regulatory oversight to correct and improve their capital position .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Add My Son To My Policy For His Car If I Am Not On The Title ?
Insurance always follows the vehicle so the owner of the vehicle has to maintain insurance in his or her name . If your son 's car is solely titled to him he would need to obtain a separate insurance policy . If your son still lives with you , you want to add him as a resident driver and have him add you as a resident driver on his policy . Depending on your insurance company if you are both insured with the same company the company wil cross reference policies to secure a multi-car discount .
Insurance always follows the vehicle so the owner of the vehicle has to maintain insurance in his or her name . If your son 's car is solely titled to him he would need to obtain a separate insurance policy . If your son still lives with you , you want to add him as a resident driver and have him add you as a resident driver on his policy . Depending on your insurance company if you are both insured with the same company the company wil cross reference policies to secure a multi-car discount .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Not necessarily , all due respect to your CPA . If your son has a car that is titled to him and he wants to register the car to use on your state 's public access roads and highways , then it is highly likel ; y that the atete will require that he have his own insurance . The question about the amount of coverage he may need , or should have , certainly can in some fashion be based upon the extent of his assets , but I recommend to my clients that it is important to keep in mind that their child is still residing in their home and is more than likely still being claimed as a dependent . Depending upon the laws in your state , it may be that even with his own car , registered and insured in his name , should he cause a serious accident that results in a law suit , the coverage provided in his policy may not be enough to absorb the settlement . In that case , you may be included in the action . Remember a key point here , insurance only provides coverage , it does not limit liability . You may want to include your attorney and your Insurance Professional in this discussion in order to be sure you are receiving the most complete advice .
I previously posted this piece in response to a renter insurance question . I am sharing it here , hoping that it might be of value in answer to this inquiry . Mr. Pipes provides a good summary before me and concludes with an important question . I am adding this message with a personal example of the value of this coverage . Renters insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and several other common loss circumstances . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
As a big do it yourselfer , the answer is maybe ? It depends on what your situation is and how adept you are on gathering information and making a good decision from all the information out there . I mean I like to work on my cars and trucks . I can do many things myself and feel really good about it . However , I do still use my trusted mechanic for the things I simply am not good enough to do myself and that way I avoid putting my family at risk . As another noted , there are absolutely no price savings in going without an agent . The laws in most states prevent any discounting for doing it yourself . It never ever hurts to become informed about a product . I have taught my son the doctor , how to frame a house , wire a house and have a general understanding about construction . He 's a doctor now , and yes , that is fun to say , he has learned enough about how to build that when he decides to build , he can have a good conversation with a builder and know when to call shenanigans or not . By all means it pays to educate yourself , but understand that an open mind is required to educate yourself .
Both Michael and Dan have provided useful information here . I would like to add a personal circumstance that I have often shared , in hopes that it will increase awareness of the importance of this coverage . As both Gentleman have indicated , a landlord can require that the renter 's policy be a term within a lease . Absent a State law that would preclude inclusion of such a clause , it can be a requirement . I saw the value of this important insurance coverage first-hand , when my two Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere , while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court , as a frivolous allegation , the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence claim , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
Mr. Erickson has provided useful information here . I would like to add a personal circumstance that I have often shared , in hopes that it will increase awareness of the importance of this coverage . As Mr. Erickson has indicated , a landlord can require that the renter 's policy be a requirement within a lease . Absent a State law that would preclude inclusion of such a clause , it can be a requirement . I saw the value of this important insurance coverage first-hand , when my two Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere , while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court , as a frivolous allegation , the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence claim , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
That is a really good question ! I am glad that your son was n't badly hurt ; God is good ! Insurance companies on the other hand are not quite so giving ... In a no fault State , the payment for claims is not dependent upon who caused the accident . Each person files with their own company , regardless of who was at fault . Your son 's insurance company would therefore be liable for the claim for damages and/or medical expenses , and would pay them according to the terms dictated in the policy . That would include , unfortunately , the deductible and co-pays . They should cover everything over those , but I 'd expect them to poke you for the deductible and your son 's share of the expenses . You can try to dispute it , and with the help of a lawyer , possibly be able to sue in small claims court the driver -LRB- or the other driver , if there was another car that had caused the accident -RRB- for those costs . I hope it all works out well for him and you , and that his healing is quick and complete . Thank you for asking !
Although I have answered similar questions of this nature previously , it is such an important coverage that I will repeat it . While I obviously do not know your particular situation and whether or not your landlord requires you to maintain renters insurance , I can tell you the following that might help you see the value of some of the coverages provided . Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . That alone would have cost them heavy legal fees . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
I am working on a case right now in which my client has applied for 11 policies . Here is the breakdown : He is a partner in one business with two other fellows . They have just completed a buy-sell agreement and are funding the agreement with life insurance . Per the advice of their accountant and their attorney , they are purchasing several policies to cover both the current and the anticipated future value of the business . One policy will be owned by the business , and four other policies will be owned by a trust . That gives us five policies so far . My client is also a partner in a second business , with another fellow . They are following the same funding strategy . That business will own one policy , and the trust will own an additional four . Our count is now up to 10 policies . But these policies take care only of business needs . My client is also married with children . He needs life insurance for family protection . So he is purchasing yet another policy for their benefit . That gives us 11 . The underwriter is fine with this set up . My client can justify the need for all policies financially . All policies have been deemed appropriate with regard to the financial needs of the business and the financial needs of his family . And you know what ? He could buy more if he wanted to . Lets suppose he supported a number of charities . They could be religious , or social service , or political . He could take out a separate policy for each of their benefit . Five charities , five more policies . But we have another consideration . What if his net worth is over $ 5 million , and he wants to preserve his estate for his heirs ? What if he wants to avoid forcing his family to liquidate his assets just to pay Uncle Sams estate tax bill ? He could buy life insurance to cover the tax bill . Another policy . We are not done yet :-RRB- . What if his parents were financially dependent on him . It happens . What if his premature demise would put them in financial straits ? He could buy life insurance on himself for their benefit , so they could be well taken care of . Do you realize that in this scenario , this one client could take out 20 or so policies ? And it would all be financially justified and appropriate . How do you like that ? Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
I have answered this question previously but it is such an important coverage that I will repeat it . Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time .
I love CPA 's . They give great accounting advice and some of them even know other things . But the `` minimum limits '' advice defies his training in some important ways . What your son lacks in `` assets '' he more than makes up for in terms of `` potential '' . What I mean here is that he may not have it now , but due to his young age , he 'll have a long time to earn and pay . Even though he is only 18 does not mean that he can not be responsible for an injury or death , or damage to property , and be subjected to an order of the court to garnishee his wage to make reimbursement to those who were injured , killed , or had property damaged . Now , should have have his own insurance ? Assuming he owns the car , he probably needs his own insurance . Staying in the household under household coverage is also OK but some insurers concern themselves with the owner of the car being different than the insured on the policy so proceed with caution when the vehicle is not actually owned by the policyholder . As a practical matter , the discounts that you might enjoy are lost to the child in many cases when they have their own policy . Some companies will extend multi-policy discounts to children of the policy owner . Some discounts do n't come through this connection , however . I like kids learning the responsibility of maintaining their own insurance . It gets the loss off the parents record , for one . Parents can help subsidize the cost if they want and help provide this as a reward for good outcomes on something else . All things said and done , I like responsible children on their own policies but deal with young drivers both on and off the parents policies so it comes down to personal preference and whether you are dealing with issues that poison the whole policy because of the young driver , or not , in many cases .
Children can stay on your car insurance as long as they live with you and the car is titled in your name . When your son or daughter moves out or they purchase a vehicle titled in their name they would need to get their own insurance policy . Their are pros and cons for children having their own insurance policy so check with your agent to see which option is better for you .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Short Term Life Insurance ?
Term life insurance is available in a wide range of coverage periods . The more popular are 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 year term periods often featuring guaranteed level premiums during the full period and conversion provisions -LRB- to permanent coverage -RRB- . You can find a few competitive one year term policies where the premium escalates annually . The guarantees are limited and the cost averages out over 10 years to be similar to 10 year level term .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
The general answer to your question is `` Yes . '' Though the renewal policy varies from insurance carrier to insurance carrier and may also be impacted by insurance department requirements in your state . Most short term medical policies can be renewed at least once and with some carriers and in some states perhaps up to three times . As a consequence of rising health insurance rates for ObamaCare compliant individual major medical policies for persons who qualify for little or no premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplaces the interest in Short Term Major Medical plans has increased significantly . Insurance carriers have been modifying their Short Term Medical policies to take advantage of this opportunity and so there are many more options being made available and being offered for longer terms -LRB- some up to 11 months -RRB- than has historically been the case in this product segment . Short Term Major Medical insurance can be an affordable option for individuals who can pass relatively simple underwriting screening and who have no pre-existing condition concerns . A person considering this option should seek the services of an insurance broker who represents multiple carriers and who can help you find the policy best suited to your needs . You should also be aware that a Short Term Major Medical Plan does not qualify as minimum essential coverage under the terms of the Affordable Care Act and that you will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 95 or 1 % of your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- on your 2014 taxes . However , this penalty can only be recovered from a tax refund and the premium savings may far outweigh any potential tax penalty some individuals might be faced with .
Short Term disability Insurance pays a percentage of your salary if you become temporarily disabled , meaning that you are not able to work for a short period of time due to a sickness or injury -LRB- excluding on-the-job-injuries , which are covered by workers compensation insurance -RRB- . A typical short-term disability insurance policy provides you with 40 to 65 percent of your pre-disability base salary , according to the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners estimates that these benefits generally last between three to six months . Most short-term disability insurance policies have a `` cap '' , meaning you receive a maximum benefit amount per month . Short-term disability insurance policies also have a limit on the amount of times that you can receive benefits-up to two years , according to the Insurance Information Institute . .
Short term disability insurance pays a percentage of your salary for a specified amount of time if you are ill or injured and can not perform the duties of your occupation . Please note , you may be required to use up your sick days -LRB- if applicable -RRB- before your short term disability coverage will start making payments . If you have short term coverage , you may want to consider supplementing it with long termdisabilityinsurance as many people who need to use their short term disability coverage will often be unable to work for longer than the short term plan allows . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your disability insurance program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Short term disability insurance is paycheck protection in case of a disability event . And many consumers can only afford short term disability versus long term disability coverage . Mutual of Omaha is a major carrier in short term disability insurance . Keep in mind that you may have short term disability insurance through your employers group benefit plan . You also have Social Security disability insurance , although benefits may be limited .
Short term life insurance , such as 5 year Term or 10 year Term , can cost much less than life insurance locked in for longer periods of time , such as 30 year Term Life insurance or Universal Life . However , when that short term is complete , the price for that policy will jump extremely high . If the insured person 's health has gotten worse during that time , he/she may need to pay much higher premiums or possibly may not even qualify for a new life insurance policy . Therefore , it is important to look at the need involved , when purchasing a life insurance policy . If you are 40 years old and want it to cover your children going to college , getting a short term policy may suffice . If you want it to pay for your funeral , then it is better go with some type permanent plan .
Short term medical insurance provides benefits to the insured for specified period of time . Here are a few things to note about Short Term medical coverage : Term is 1-12 months Pre exisitng conditions are not covered . Typically catastrophic coverage in nature . Must be in the US . Can not be currently pregnant . Short term in an excellent solution for people inbetween jobs , recent graduates , an alternative to COBRA or for those that can not afford 2014 reform rates . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized short term medical quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
Before shopping for short term disability insurance , first determine if your employer 's group benefit plan offers it . If your an executive or key person in the company , you may ask for short term disability insurance to be added to your compensation package . Short term disability benefits usually is designed for two years . Short term disability is paycheck protection against illness or injury recovery .
There is a huge inventory of disability insurance companies that carry short term disability and some short term disability group plans for business . Before purchasing short term disability insurance , make sure your employer does n't offer it . Here are a few on short term disability companies that come to mind Mutual of Omaha , Aflac , Lincoln Financial Group .
Short or long term disability has an elimination period that must be satisfied before benefits are paid out . On long term disability , the elimination period can be as short as 30 days and as long as two years . Depending on your employee benefits at work , you may have short term disability . Depending on the coverage , some use their short term disability benefits as a supplement or as an elimination period .
When you think about the cents on the dollar that you spend for life insurance ... it 's extremely cheap . Figuring out what type of life insurance to buy is a more involved process . Everyone 's needs are different , meaning there 's no one size fits all policy in life insurance . What 's right for you depends on what need -LRB- s -RRB- you 're trying to take care of in the event of your death . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term protection , estate planning , retirement planning and other needs . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . The advantage of permanent insurance is that it 's going to eventually pay out a claim -LRB- if structured properly -RRB- because it 's an inevitability , not a possibility . Term insurance acts more like a gamble . There 's pros and cons to both sides and it 's important to review your options with an experienced life insurance agent who can go through all these things with you and find the structure that will best meet your needs and your budget .
5 Year Term Life Insurance can be annual renewable term or guaranteed level term . Using a short period for term life insurance can provide inexpensive coverage . Some short period term life insurance can also include a convertibility clause to permanent life insurance that could extend term coverage in the event that the original financial liability remains after five years or new liabilities have emerged .
Most financial advisers recommend getting Long Term Disability over Short Term Disability because more people can survive a short period of being without income , rather than a long term period . Also , Long Term Disability Insurance is easier to get , with more companies offering it . And Short Term Disability Insurance is offered more commonly in the workplace .
Short Term Disability is used to replace approx 40-70 % of your salary if disabled for a `` short '' period of time . Most short term disabilities last from 3-6 months , although the cap can be as high as two years . The coverage may kick in as soon as the disability is determined , or there may be a waiting period . If purchasing your own policy , the higher the premium you pay , the shorter the waiting period . Some of the uses for short term disability are partial income replacement in case of pregnancy , muscle strains , broken bones , pneumonia , heart attack , or chemotherapy treatments .
end question
start question
annuities
What Companies Offer Hybrid Annuities ?
Many companies are offer hybrid annuities or annuities with morbidity riders like long term care , critical illness , catastrophic illness , terminal illness , etc. . But one of the leading annuity distributors in One America , popular for their long term care rider on the fixed interest rate annuity that accepts 1035 exchanges from other annuities .
Hybrid annuities are fixed indexed annuities , equity indexed annuities , or variable annuities with a rider that offers lifetime income . Some also offer enhanced death benefit , long term care , and/or home health care . Hybrid annuities work by allowing the buyer to invest funds in a fixed account as well as variable account . The fixed account provides the guaranteed funds and the variable components provide for greater return by investing in non-guaranteed securities .
Hybrid Term life insurance is Term Life insurance has a second type of insurance combined with it . E.g. . A Hybrid Term Life policy might be a blend of traditional Term insurance combined with Accidental Death or long term care benefits . Fidelity Life offers a Hybrid Term Life insurance policy that allows you to get nearly instant Life coverage combined with Accidental Death coverage . Then after you take an exam , the policy becomes 100 % traditional Life coverage . Hybrid life insurance can be a good way to get two types of coverage in one policy at a lower price than if both were purchased separately . Or as in the case of Fidelity Hybrid Term insurance , it can be a way to get quick coverage at a reasonable price , and be able to take your time in changing it over to a pure Term Life policy .
Generally speaking , hybrid life insurance products combine two types of life insurance coverage into one product . When many people hear the word hybrid life insurance , they think of Term , Whole or Universal Life products combined with long term care type benefits . But there are other type of hybrid products that have gained popularity these days . Universal Life that is combined with Term is a hot seller due to its increased flexibility and ability to be offered to older ages . Also , a new Term product on the market offers Term life combined with Accidental Death benefits with no exam , at very reasonable prices and issued within days . Then after the exam is taken the entire policy can be changed to regular life insurance , if desired . For information about hybrid products , it is a good idea to call the agency selling them to get more details .
That depends on what you mean by a `` hybrid '' annuity . usually , a hybrid annuity is an annuity that combines Long Term Care Insurance benefits with it . Currently , Lincoln Financial , Genworth , and Mutual of Omaha all have Annuity/LTCI combo products . I would suggest using an independent annuity expert to help you shop the market and find which one fits your situation best .
A hybrid life insurance policy blends both non-medical and fully underwritten coverage . The idea is you get a portion of the death benefit being applied for as full coverage without an exam -LRB- the rest being AD&D coverage -RRB- and the rest turns into full coverage after an exam is completed and you 're approved . The initial process can be completed in just a few days -LRB- typically 48 hours or so -RRB- - when the exam is completed , it can take a few weeks for the underwriting to be wrapped up . Once the initial non-medical coverage is in force , you can then decide to take an exam to turn the rest of the coverage into full coverage -LRB- you generally have a window of about 6 months to complete the exam - can vary by carrier -RRB- . Even if you come up with poor numbers and are declined for the rest of the coverage being turned into full coverage , you can still keep the initial format of the plan because it 's already in force . It 's probably easier to envision with an example . If you apply for $ 250,000 of coverage with a 20-year term period under a hybrid life policy and you 're approved for the non-medical side -LRB- again , typically takes only a couple of days -RRB- , only a portion of the coverage will be full coverage . So let 's say the coverage is actually $ 100,000 of full coverage and $ 150,000 is AD&D -LRB- actual ratios will vary by carrier -RRB- . This means that if you died without completing the exam and getting the rest of the coverage approved , only $ 100,000 would be paid out instead of the full $ 250,000 . The only way the full $ 250,000 would be paid is if you died under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . It sounds like a great idea on paper , right ? You 're getting coverage quickly and you 've got something locked in in case you ca n't qualify for the full coverage transition . There 's a huge issue with this type of program !!!! The RATE PER $ 1,000 of full coverage that you 're paying under a hybrid life policy can -LRB- and likely will be -RRB- A LOT higher than you would be paying for coverage under a traditional life policy - meaning you can end up spending a ton of extra money on premiums unnecessarily that could easily be in your own pocket . The chances of a claim for AD&D coverage is slim to none . You 're most likely to die from illness than you are to die from injury . *** You want to be paying the lowest cost per $ 1,000 of full coverage - this is the key point you want to look at when you 're buying your coverage . *** Think about it this way . If you 've got a $ 250,000 non-medical policy and a $ 250,000 hybrid policy , and the premium for the hybrid policy is less , you 're actually paying a much higher rate because only a portion of the face amount is full coverage , where as the entire face amount under the regular non-med policy is 100 % full coverage . But you can just take the exam and turn it into full coverage right ? Problem solved ? - NO !!! If you 're willing to take an exam in the first place , you may as well have just done a traditional fully underwritten program to start with , because the premiums for those programs are substantially less than they are for hybrid policies and you have full coverage from day 1 . The long and short of it is this - if you do n't want to take an exam , buy a non-medical policy . If you 're willing to take an exam to lower your premiums or secure a higher amount of coverage , apply for a fully underwritten program because you 're going to get much better rates . The idea with hybrid policies is to try to get the best of both worlds , but the process just does n't make much sense with how much you 're spending for full coverage . I hope this provides some clarification for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Hybrid Life Insurance refers to a type of policy that is a blend of two types of coverage . E.g. . A blend of Term and Whole Life , or Term and Universal Life , or Universal Life and Long Term Care . Hybrid Term Life is also the name of a policy offered by Fidelity Life . It starts out as a blend of Life and Accidental Death coverage , then changes to all Life insurance after the Insured person takes an exam within 6 months . The advantage of starting out with the hybrid policy -LRB- which goes into effect almost immediately -RRB- , vs binding coverage with other policies , is that the Insured gets to keep the policy regardless of whether or not they are approved for the pure Life policy later . In fact , the Insured could have a heart attack or be diagnosed with cancer and still get to keep that blend of Life and Accidental Death that is not graded . Another advantage can be for those who need something quick . E.g. . They are going on a trip , or need a policy to satisfy a divorce decree , or get a loan , or to wait until their blood pressure medication kicks in . If they do go on to get the pure Life policy , the rates are quite competitive with other medically underwritten policies . The only downside I see with Fidelity 's Hybrid Term Life Insurance is that it is hard to explain and understand .
The word hybrid means composite formed by mixed origins , in which the differing components all perform somewhat the same function . In hybrid annuities , buyers can use the differing components of fixed and variable accounts to allocate funds within one annuity . The results is an annuity that has part of it with a guaranteed return , along with the potential for a higher return -LRB- or loss -RRB- from the variable component .
In many cases yes . Hybrid vehicles typically have a higher valuation than other vehicles within their respective class than non-hybrid vehicles . So if you have comprehensive and collision coverage on your vehicle will more than likely cost you more for coverage . As far as the costs for liability coverage that can vary from carrier to carrier . Contact a local agent to find out more information about rates for hybrid vehicles within your area .
Assuming that the phrase income is benefit payments from a long term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- policy or from a hybrid annuity-long term care insurance rider policy , the answer should be no . There is a question on hybrid life insurance , but generally payouts on the LTCi claim are not characterized as income .
Hybrid life insurance combines life insurance with other types of coverage such as accidental death insurance , long term care benefits , or even a combination of universal life and term insurance . Being able to get two types of policies in one can save expense and certainly cuts down on the hassle and paperwork of owning multiple policies . However , it is wise to review the features of the hybrid to make sure you understand the policy and are getting what you want .
This is a great question , Should you have Long-Term Care Insurance . If you look at the statistics , you have a greater than 50 % chance of needing Long-Term care services which tend to be very expensive . Can you depend on your family to take care of you or are you better off getting a product which gives you the flexibility to pay for the services you need when you need them ? Long-Term Care -LRB- LTC -RRB- Insurance is expensive so be sure to understand what your needs may be and when you the insurance becomes available . There are now many `` hybrid '' products available which provide some LTC at a fraction of the cost but may have limitations . Be sure to talk to your Broker or a Broker who understands the limitations on LTC and any of the `` hybrid '' products .
Hybrid Life Insurance Policies could be addressing two product items , perhaps more . Hybrid life insurance products of the past are generally referring to a permanent form of life insurance with a term life insurance rider . But more recently it refers to adding living benefits to a term or permanent life insurance policy like long term care , critical illness , catastrophic care , disability , etc. .
Retirement plans continue to `` Evolve '' and not necessarily change . In this instance the term hybrid retirement plan may include plans that were popular in the 1980 's and 1990 's , they are -LRB- cash balance , pension equity , floor-offset , age-weighted profit-sharing , new comparability profit-sharing and target benefit plans -RRB- . Today , usually hybrid plans combine features of a defined benefit and defined contribution plan , to bridge the predicted crisis by many experts of the liabilities that are underfunded in traditional defined benefit plans .
Hybrid annuities are generally annuities with morbidity riders or embedded contract provisions like long term care , critical illness , catastrophic events , etc. . Some of these added living benefits are free or have extra charges associated with them . Some annuities with long term care may have some tax advantages under the Pension Protection Act that could be very valuable to a policy owner .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
There are two genres of Life Insurance , -LRB- Term and Permanent -RRB- , but there are at least 10 different Kinds within those genres . So your question is a very important one to know the answer to ! Universal Life is most often referred to as Permanent insurance , but it 's really a hybrid of Term and Whole Life ... and it will expire and be void of cash value and any benefits at some point unless you ` over fund ' it . Unfortunately that part is rarely explained to people when buying insurance . The main kinds of Term Insurance are Mortgage , Credit and Life . They 're all basically the same in that they are in force for a limited period of time and pay the benefit amount to the named beneficiary upon the death of the insured . In the case of mortgage and credit policies the beneficiary is the mortgage or credit provider . In the case of Term Life usually the beneficiary is the spouse , children or other relative of the insured . Also with Term Life there may be an accelerated benefit rider that pays a percentage of the death benefit to the insured in the case of critical or chronic illness or injury . There are a large variety of Permanent Life policies available . Whole Life Paid Up at a predetermined age , -LRB- such as 65 , 95 , 121 , etc -RRB- , is the kind that never ` expires ' and continues to grow cash value until the benefit is paid . As mentioned above there are `` Universal Life '' policies , which can be ` fixed ' , ` indexed ' or ` variable ' . Indexed and variable are tied to the stock market with regard to their cash value , but all are a hybrid of term and permanent . There are other kinds of Whole Life designed for business partners , -LRB- Buy out -RRB- , and for businesses , -LRB- Key Man -RRB- , etc. . So when looking to implement life insurance your best bet is to utilize the services of an insurance Adviser who is not tied to just one provider and can be unbiased help you to determine the best policy for your specific needs and goals . Please contact me if you want more information .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Fidelity Life Association offers individual life insurance products including LifeStory Term , Hybrid Life , Rapid Decision Express , Rapid Decision Universal Life , Rapid Decision Mortgage Term , Rapid Decision Senior Term and Whole Life , and Accidental Death Benefit . Most of these do not require an exam . Contact a website that offers Fidelity Life quotes in the list of quotes to talk to an agent that sells Fidelity Life Association insurance prodcuts .
In addition to Peggy 's answer I would also look at all the options that are available which may or may not make sense for your situation . There are many `` hybrid '' products now that can provide you monies to cover LTC expenses but also provide other valuable coverage or funds . Look into Life Insurance which gives you access to the death benefit what you have a chronic condition . Please be aware that before you purchase any of these products I want you to understand what is covered and what is not . I am simply saying here there are alternatives versus just purchasing a Long-Term care policy which can be cost prohibited .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Get Life Insurance Without A Medical Exam ?
To get life insurance without a medical exam , you first contact a life insurance agency that sells that type of policy . Then , depending on the policy , you fill out an application over the phone and sign it digitally , or on paper and fax or mail it to your agent . Some no exam policies will then require a phone interview . The person doing the interview will try to call you , and leave a number if they can not reach you , that you can call back at your convenience . Some no exam policies will order medical records from your doctor . Most often , that step is not required . When approved , most life insurance without a medical exam will draft your first premium and put it into effect as soon as it is approved . Some will let you pay the premium after you receive the policy in the mail . In addition to the above , there are some nonmedical life insurance policies that will do a phone interview with you and your agent to fill out the application and put the policy into effect all at the same time .
The type of life insurance polices that do not require a medical exam are guaranteed issue life and simplified issue life . Guaranteed issue life are typically low face amount policies and most are graduated meaning the death benefit starts low and increases with time . A simplified issue policy usually requires a phone interview and still has medical questions . It just does not require a paramed exam for blood and urine . These policies typically issue faster than fully underwritten plans but are a bit more expensive due to increased risk from less information underwriting .
No Medical Exam Life Insurance -LRB- also called No Exam Life Insurance , Nonmed Life Insurance , Simplified Life Insurance , Guaranteed Life Insurance , and other titles -RRB- is life insurance that does not require taking a paramed exam . More to the point , it does not require giving a blood sample , which is the part of the exam that some people want to avoid . No Medical Exam Life Insurance usually costs more than life insurance that does require an exam , for very healthy people . But for those who are overweight , get `` white coat syndrome '' -LRB- high blood pressure while having exams -RRB- , or have not had their cholesterol checked for years , foregoing an exam can result in very competitive rates . It is not unusual for someone to apply for a medically underwritten policy , get rated up for something they did not know they had , and end up paying more than the No Exam policy would have cost . Also , for those with serious health conditions , No Medical Exam Life Insurance is often the only type of life insurance available to them . Finally , many people like No Exam policies because they feel that the time spent in taking the exam and waiting for the underwriter to review their medical records -LRB- if the latter is needed -RRB- is not worth it . While it is not always an option , it is nice to have some No Medical Exam policies to choose from . Agents selling both types of coverage can help you discern which is best for you .
You can buy term life insurance in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- with an exam , or 2 -RRB- without an exam . 1 -RRB- With an exam . You would choose this option if you have reasonably good health , because you will be evaluated by your exam results to see if you qualify . Also , taking a medically underwritten policy that requires an exam is generally for those who want a larger face amount than a a burial policy . It can save you money to go to the added effort of taking the exam , and the exam does not incur any cost to you . It is generally done in your home , and entails a blood sample , urine sample , height , weight , blood pressure , pulse , and medical questions . Backing up , you first contact a website or agency to decide what face amount and length of term you want . You will be asked many medical questions to determine which company has your best price . Then you fill out an application , either by paper or online or over the phone . The exam follows , and possibly the underwriter will order medical records from your doctor -LRB- s -RRB- . When a decision has been made , some agents call you to tell you -LRB- e.g. we give you the option to change the face amount or term if it did not turn out as hoped -RRB- . Some just mail you the policy . You accept it by filling out some delivery paperwork . Payment can be done by check -LRB- almost always reserved for quarterly , semi-annual or annual payments -RRB- or bank or credit card draft . 2 -RRB- Without an exam . People often choose this method for : a. smaller policies , b. because they can not qualify for a policy that requires an exam , c. because they do not like having their blood drawn , and/or d. because they do n't want to go through the hassle of an exam . Some no exam policies have quite reasonable rates , especially for those who would qualify as standard on medically underwritten policies . This type of application is usually filled out online and signed digitally , but can be done by paper application , as well . The process goes a lot faster than applying for a policy requiring an exam . The policy often goes into effect as soon as approved and the first payment is drafted . I hope that helps . Please feel free to contact me for more information .
It can take from hours to months to be approved for life insurance . If you are applying for a simplified issue policy that requires no exam or medical records , can be signed digitally and approved on the phone , it may go into effect very quickly . The cons : this type of policy does not dig too deep , and can decline you very easily if you do not fit their exact criteria . They also usually charge higher rates to cover the risk of not knowing everything about you . The pros are that you get by without the hassle of an exam and can get the coverage very quickly . When applying for a larger policy that does require an exam and medical records , the time in underwriting largely depends on when you schedule your exam and how long it takes for your doctor 's office to send your records to the life insurance company . Another thing that can hold up approval is if you saw a doctor that the underwriter wants input from , but records were not ordered from that doctor , or the doctor has left and no one knows where those records are . Finally , an insurance website or agency that is not skilled at working this type of case can slow things down by simply not knowing how to stay on top of cases like this . To speed up approvals for a case involving exam and medical records : 1 -RRB- use an agent who has experience in impaired risk underwriting ; 2 -RRB- list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , and all doctors who made your diagnoses ; 3 -RRB- schedule your exam ASAP ; 4 -RRB- notify your doctors that medical records will be ordered , or obtain the records yourself ; and 5 -RRB- answer all questions from your agent and/or case manager promptly . These tips can cut the time for approval , even in a complicated case , from months to weeks .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
A hybrid life insurance policy blends both non-medical and fully underwritten coverage . The idea is you get a portion of the death benefit being applied for as full coverage without an exam -LRB- the rest being AD&D coverage -RRB- and the rest turns into full coverage after an exam is completed and you 're approved . The initial process can be completed in just a few days -LRB- typically 48 hours or so -RRB- - when the exam is completed , it can take a few weeks for the underwriting to be wrapped up . Once the initial non-medical coverage is in force , you can then decide to take an exam to turn the rest of the coverage into full coverage -LRB- you generally have a window of about 6 months to complete the exam - can vary by carrier -RRB- . Even if you come up with poor numbers and are declined for the rest of the coverage being turned into full coverage , you can still keep the initial format of the plan because it 's already in force . It 's probably easier to envision with an example . If you apply for $ 250,000 of coverage with a 20-year term period under a hybrid life policy and you 're approved for the non-medical side -LRB- again , typically takes only a couple of days -RRB- , only a portion of the coverage will be full coverage . So let 's say the coverage is actually $ 100,000 of full coverage and $ 150,000 is AD&D -LRB- actual ratios will vary by carrier -RRB- . This means that if you died without completing the exam and getting the rest of the coverage approved , only $ 100,000 would be paid out instead of the full $ 250,000 . The only way the full $ 250,000 would be paid is if you died under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . It sounds like a great idea on paper , right ? You 're getting coverage quickly and you 've got something locked in in case you ca n't qualify for the full coverage transition . There 's a huge issue with this type of program !!!! The RATE PER $ 1,000 of full coverage that you 're paying under a hybrid life policy can -LRB- and likely will be -RRB- A LOT higher than you would be paying for coverage under a traditional life policy - meaning you can end up spending a ton of extra money on premiums unnecessarily that could easily be in your own pocket . The chances of a claim for AD&D coverage is slim to none . You 're most likely to die from illness than you are to die from injury . *** You want to be paying the lowest cost per $ 1,000 of full coverage - this is the key point you want to look at when you 're buying your coverage . *** Think about it this way . If you 've got a $ 250,000 non-medical policy and a $ 250,000 hybrid policy , and the premium for the hybrid policy is less , you 're actually paying a much higher rate because only a portion of the face amount is full coverage , where as the entire face amount under the regular non-med policy is 100 % full coverage . But you can just take the exam and turn it into full coverage right ? Problem solved ? - NO !!! If you 're willing to take an exam in the first place , you may as well have just done a traditional fully underwritten program to start with , because the premiums for those programs are substantially less than they are for hybrid policies and you have full coverage from day 1 . The long and short of it is this - if you do n't want to take an exam , buy a non-medical policy . If you 're willing to take an exam to lower your premiums or secure a higher amount of coverage , apply for a fully underwritten program because you 're going to get much better rates . The idea with hybrid policies is to try to get the best of both worlds , but the process just does n't make much sense with how much you 're spending for full coverage . I hope this provides some clarification for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
The cost of No Exam life insurance varies a lot because No Exam life insurance is use for so many reasons . Some people get No Exam insurance for convenience . In those cases , if they have very good health , the person may be able to get a lower price if applying for a policy that requires an exam . But to them , it is worth it to not miss time off work and go through the blood sample and exam . Some people get No Exam insurance because they are obese or have a health condition that does not qualify them for a medically underwritten policy . While the cost might seem high , for them it is worth it . Other persons can actually sometimes get a lower price with No Exam insurance than they could with life insurance requiring an exam . This can be the case with final expense insurance , overweight life insurance , or life insurance for persons of older ages . Part of the reason is that No Exam life insurance offers a minimum face amount requirement than most medically underwritten policies .
Of course , how much life insurance costs for a 20 year old depends on how much life insurance the 20 year old is purchasing , how long they want the premium to be locked in , whether they have any health problems , and if they want to purchase a policy that requires an exam or goes with a quick policy requiring no medical exam . For a very healthy nonsmoker at age 20 , who is purchasing $ 100,000 of 30 year level Term without having to take an exam , the price is about $ 25/month . This is much less if you take an exam .
The most Life Insurance I have heard of being able to get without a medical exam is $ 500,000 in one policy . However , you can purchase more than one life insurance policy without a medical exam . It would not be difficult to purchase $ 1,000,000 of No Exam life insurance by purchasing 3 policies .
To get life insurance without a medical exam , you first contact a life insurance agency that sells that type of policy . Then , depending on the policy , you fill out an application over the phone and sign it digitally , or on paper and fax or mail it to your agent . Some no exam policies will then require a phone interview . The person doing the interview will try to call you , and leave a number if they can not reach you , that you can call back at your convenience . Some no exam policies will order medical records from your doctor . Most often , that step is not required . When approved , most life insurance without a medical exam will draft your first premium and put it into effect as soon as it is approved . Some will let you pay the premium after you receive the policy in the mail . In addition to the above , there are some nonmedical life insurance policies that will do a phone interview with you and your agent to fill out the application and put the policy into effect all at the same time .
Filling out the life insurance application itself takes about 30 minutes for a medically underwritten policy -LRB- one that requires a paramed exam -RRB- . Having your drivers license , the date of birth and possibly Social Security numbers of your beneficiaries , and all your doctors ' information on hand will save time in filling it out . Once the application is submitted , you will take your free exam in your home or other place of your choice . Sometimes medical records are ordered . The time it takes complete the process depends partly on how quickly you take your exam and how quickly records are obtained . If you apply for a policy without an exam , the policy is issued much more quickly .
Some Term Life Insurance requires an exam and some Term policies do not . There are No Exam Term Life policies for up to $ 500,000 . Therefore , you could get several policies and get up to $ 1,000,000 of coverage without having to take a paramed exam , if you wish . For those with perfect health , taking an exam can usually save you some money . However , if you are overweight or have other minor health problems , No Exam Term can be surprisingly competitive . For some people , the inconvenience of having to take off work to do the exam , or a dislike of needles , is worth the slightly higher price of getting nonmed Term Life . There are many life insurance policies that do not require a physical . Please do not hesitate to drop me an email if you 'd like to see some options .
Good points y' all ... What was the desired answer from the question ... The exam for GETTING life insurance -LRB- there has n't been an exam for health insurance in most states for YEARS . Now with PPACA , there are no exams for sure -RRB- . or ... the exam to get a license ? Since this site is for people to ask questions about insurance products & coverage , I assume it was NOT about getting licensed . For life insurance , the exam , or lack thereof , depends on the carrier & the amount you are applying for . The same person would have a light exam -LRB- small blood draw , tinkle in a cup , blood pressure reading , & questions -RRB- for a lower benefit amount -LRB- like 100K - 250K -RRB- vs. a larger benefit amount of 1 million . Think of it this way , `` The more you want from them , the more they 'll want from you . '' :--RRB- There are carriers that offer `` no exam '' underwriting options . MOST of these plans are for smaller amounts -LRB- under 250K -RRB- . The underwriting is typically pretty quick . The process can be as little as a few days . The tradeoff for not probing as deeply into you -LRB- literally -RRB- is that the cost of insurance is higher . You are likely to get the same coverage for less if you are willing to take an exam . Compare the length of coverage , extra coverage like Living Benefits , the convenience factor -LRB- exam or no exam -RRB- , the underwriting possibilities appetite of the carrier -LRB- your agent should discuss WHY this carrier is best over others - - the reason should be `` best underwriting for YOU '' -RRB- , and THEN the rate . Rates are relative to what you can qualify for . DO N'T fall for the big `` Dot coms '' that say you can get 500K for $ 20 a month ... MOST of use can not get that . If you have any questions , please reach out !! - gravy
How does no medical exam life insurance work ? Basically they look at your health history through sources like the MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- where your medical records are wharehoused . What you 'll find if you compare fully underwritten insurance with no medical exam insurance is the price for no medical exam coverage will be higher . It is up to the individual to decide if they want the underwriting discount that a medical exam can provide .
If you are applying for a policy that requires an exam , there is the chance that the underwriter will want to see your medical records . As an impaired risk life insurance specialist , I have seen several cases take nearly 6 months due to the complexity , amount , and elusiveness of those applicants ' medical records . This is what I have learned , to help speed up the process . 1 -RRB- Put all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , and include the doctor who diagnosed your most serious health conditions . Delays often happen because records are received , but then the underwriter notices that the patient was referred to someone else during that time . Getting all your doctors noted at the start does not necessarily mean the insurance company will order records from all of them , but at least it gives underwriters the opportunity to pick and choose which ones they want , so they order them in a timely manner . 2 -RRB- Do your exam quickly . Putting of an exam for months sets back the whole application process . Sometimes medical records are not even ordered until the exam is done . 3 -RRB- Warn your doctor or clinic that they will be getting a request for your medical records , and ask them to fill the order ASAP . You might even want to collect your own medical records to speed things up , if that is allowed . 4 -RRB- Provide additional details in a timely manner . Sometimes insurance companies will see something on your MIB or MVR or application that will cause them to need more information . Answering that extra question , filling out that extra form , or doing whatever needs to be done , can eliminate unnecessary delays . 5 -RRB- Do n't jump to another company without talking it over with your agent first . Give him/her a chance to find out where the logjam is , and get it cleared up . If you can not get answers from your agent , it 's OK to switch , but close your first application out , or transfer it to someone else . Otherwise , you may end up applying for the same policy with two different agents , and that can cause further complications and delays .
Life Insurance underwriting takes as long as it takes the life insurance underwriter to collect all the data needed to approve your policy . If you apply for a policy that does not need any exam or medical records , the process may take less than 24 hours . If they do not require an exam but can order medical records , it will take as long as it takes you or your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- to provide those records . If they require an exam , you will not be approved until at least 3 days after you take the exam . In other words , the faster you and your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- respond to the underwriter 's requests , the shorter the time it generally takes for your policy to be approved . However , things can get held up if life insurance companies get behind , the paramed examiner will not work with you to set up your exam , your doctor 's office is slow to provide your medical records to the life insurance company , and/or additional medical records must be ordered weeks or months into the process . Above all , a good Case Manager who regularly communicates with you and the insurance company can shave time off the underwriting process . Using an agency that has great customer service may not only help speed things up , it may be the key to getting your life insurance put into effect , period .
Here are the most common things people look for when buying life insurance from us . 1 -RRB- Price . They are looking for the best price for their health , age , tobacco status , etc. 2 -RRB- Exam . They want to compare policies with and without exam , and decide whether or not taking an exam is worth it for them . The majority of those who look into No Exam coverage do go ahead with no exam because : a. it is all they can get ; b. it is less risky and not much price difference than a medically underwritten policy ; or c. they need the policy in a hurry and are willing to pay extra to not take an exam . 3 -RRB- Length of Coverage : Most people who are not well versed in life insurance are concerned what will happen when their term ends and `` what happens to their premiums '' . When looking for life insurance , a shopper has to understand how different types of policies work , and the agent needs to take the time to make that explanation clear to them . 4 -RRB- Guarantees : They want to know if the premium will go up , if it will pay for death by any reason , if there is a guaranteed cash value , etc. 5 -RRB- Company Stability : They want to be sure that their life insurance company will pay out upon their death .
Yes , getting life insurance without a physical can be a very good way to get life insurance , especially if you do not fit in the very best health class due to weight or minor health conditions . People sometimes opt to take an exam because the price looks like it will be less . But then after taking the exam , they are rated higher and the price ends up being more than what a No Exam policy would have cost . No Exam life insurance makes getting life insurance much quicker and easier and less stressful .
Yes , there are life insurance policies that nearly everyone with Hepatitis C can get . The type of policy , and the price , will depend on the medical details . Having normal liver lab values and an undamaged liver as evidenced by biopsy are helpful in getting a medically underwritten policy . There will usually be a small table rating for the best cases , unless there was successful treatment eradicating the virus , then there may be no table rating added . Hepatitis C is very difficult to assess without being a medical professional and without medical records . So completing an application for an `` informal '' offer is a good idea for large cases . For small cases , there are simplified issue policies that most people can get if their Hepatitis C does not fit the criteria to get a policy requiring an exam .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Is The Number One Life Insurance Company ?
The number one life insurance company by assets and insurance in force is MetLife and its related companies . There are so many areas in ranking a life insurance company . John Hancock has the leading 5 year net investment yield . There are also six rating services that measure the financial strength and claims paying ability of many of the life insurance companies that do business in the U.S. : A.M Best , S&P , Moodys , Fitch , Weiss and Comdex . There are also product spreadsheets published by independent industry Intel groups that rank by premium cost , policy provisions and serving claims experience
If you are asking the number one life insurance company in the world by size would be China Life Insurance Co. with assets over $ 81 billion . If you are asking the number one life insurance company in the United States would be MetLife with assets over $ 62 billion . If you are asking the number one life insurance company in other categories , look them up under the independent ratings companies that rate insurers in a number of categories . The main ratings companies are AM Best , Standards & Poor 's , Fitch and Moody 's which rates insurers are their financial stability and performance . The best way to find the best life insurance company for your needs is to ask your family , friends and coworkers , who they have and are they satisfied . The same is true finding an independent life insurance broker to help you find the best company , product and price to cover your unique situation .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
The social security number is a necessary method of identifying you and your record . Most insurers use this number to zero in on your identity . Unfortunately , your social security number is used to identify you and your record to insurance carriers , and just about every other kind of business that is granting credit or coverage . Would n't it be nice to be able to protect this one vital bit of information and have another identifying number we could use ? But I digress ... But , as identifiers go , the social security number is probably the best current way for your creditors and insurance companies to make sure you are really you . Insurance is making a bigger and bigger use of credit base underwriting and pricing every year and most carriers use credit to one extent or another in insurance eligibility and pricing . Companies are also using vast data base records of claims and driving history that are often cataloged by your address , your name , your spouse , former addresses , and even the prior owners and subsequent owners of cars you have once owned and insured . With all the potential for confusion , your social security number is one unique bit of information that is n't easily duplicated in these claims and records databases . So , in that one way , your social security number helps keep you from being lumped together with others who may have a similar name , owned your car , or lived in the same house or apartment . Your social security number has been tied to credit reports and your borrowing for decades so insurance companies use this number to be as certain as possible they are looking at your record and not someone with a similar name . While the social security number has now been exploited for way to many reasons of identification , it is good that you still have one way to separate yourself from others with similarities that can cause confusion in underwriting and pricing your insurance and that is a good thing . Hope this helps .
Life insurance is a pooled risk plan . That means that a large number of people who can not afford the loss of the death of a person contribute to a pool that reimburses when someone in the pool dies . These pools exist in some fraternal policies . These pools become more sophisticated when they become incorporated and become legal reserve life insurance companies . These companies are regulated by the state insurance commissioner in the state where they are domiciled and the state insurance commissioner in the state where they are admitted . The purpose of this regulation is to assure the public that the admitted life insurance companies doing business in your state have adequate reserves to meet all of the promises that they have made . The insurance company looks to actuarial science . Actuaries pour through death records for hundreds of years and millions of lives . The basic result is the Commissioners Standard Ordinary -LRB- CSO -RRB- tables . These take this huge amount of data and determine in a given year the average number of people -LRB- male , female -RRB- who will die in a given year . Insurance companies compare the CSO data with internal data and from that information develop their own probabilities . The actuaries then determine the amount of money that the company must collect in order to pay death claims at a given age for a given sex . This becomes the standard premium for that age -LRB- plus the cost of administration and acquiring the business and reduced by anticipated earnings on the reserves of the company . -RRB- Because companies have access to more precise information they can carve out the differences for those who smoke or use tobacco products . This becomes the first differentiation in life insurance premiums . The companies also have data derived from smaller numbers that indicate the effect of certain diseases , occupations and habits of the population . This information is passed to the underwriters who determine if the proposed insured meets the definition of a standard risk , and if they do not , why not and to what degree do they vary from the standard risk . The underwriter can lower the premium from the standard premium if the individual falls in a narrow band of height and weight . Often to receive this lower premium the underwriters will require blood and urine analysis to determine the overall health of the individual . Others are offered an increased premium if they have a condition that has proven to reduce life expectancy , or engage in an occupation that is considered hazardous . When the underwriter completes underwriting the applicant is offered a policy . Basically it says that the company will provide so much coverage for such a period of time for a certain amount . The applicant becomes a policyholder when he or she makes the initial payment . There are many other issues involved in determining the premium for a policy but the most important is how long the coverage is to last and at what amount of coverage . At that point the issue is largely mathematics and involves the company being able to meet its obligations , its promises .
The Health Insurance Claim Number -LRB- HICN -RRB- is your ID number for Medicare claims . If you have your red , white and blue medicare card , it is the number -LRB- and letters -RRB- with your name . It is a combination of a number representing the primary person responsible for the Medicare insurance -LRB- often the social security number -RRB- followed by one or two letters or numbers to represent the relationship to the primary person .
When you buy a home there are 3 numbers that come into play . The first number is the market price or purchase price . The second number is the assessed value which is what your taxes are based on . The third number is Replacement Cost which is the number used to insure your house . When insuring any home you need to make sure you have enough coverage to rebuild the structure . You do n't have to insure the land because if the house burns down the land is still going to be there . Replacement Cost for older homes is often the highest number because of the cost of materials and craftsmanship .
Health insurance policy numbers vary from one health insurance carrier to another . Some policy numbers will just be a string of digits like 8476932 with maybe a -01 , -02 , etc. , to designate the person is a spouse or dependent child under the policy . Other policy numbers can be a mixture a letters and numbers like A12345 . Your policy number will be shown on your policy certificate and on your ID card and is usually shown as Policy # ... .
The suffixes on a Medicare number are codes that tell Medicare under whose Social Security number you are being given benefits , and your relationship to that person . It is called the Beneficiary Identification Code -LRB- BIC -RRB- . A Social Security number followed by A tells Medicare that the person filing is the retired or disabled worker who paid into the system and is drawing on his/her own Medicare benefits . B signifies the wife -LRB- over age 65 -RRB- of the primary Social Security number . To see what the entire list of suffixes visit this website : WEBSITELINK
New Jersey has a number of interesting life insurance options . Many front-line carriers are licensed to operate in this state . This means that you will have available ordinary term and permanent products from name-brand carriers . There are also a number of companies that offer simplified-issue products for people who have serious medical conditions such as cancer or heart failure . Not only that , a number of excess-market underwriting syndicates make products available for exceptional risks , such as people who must travel to dangerous locations as part of their job .
Harry Crosby , a long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCI -RRB- agent , coach and trainer , has one of the best answers to this question that I know of . It 's called `` The Two Mistakes '' . In the interest of space , I have edited his take on this important question : There are really only two mistakes you can make with long-term care insurance . Mistake number one : You get one of these plans . It doesnt matter which one . You buy a plan , pay every year , live a long happy and healthy life , die in your sleep with a smile on your face and the money you paid in is gone . Right . The money you paid in is gone . Had you known that this would be the case , you would never have purchased a long-term carepolicy . Mistake number two : You stay self-insured , which is what you are doing right now . Then you -LRB- and possibly your spouse -RRB- need care . Not only do you pay for it yourself out-of-pocket , but the rest of the burden is placed on your family . Lets look at the two mistakes . Mistake number one is that you get this plan , and your premium is about $ 2,500 a year . You live another 30 years , and at age 85 you die in your sleep with a smile on your face never needing a day of care and thus never getting a dime out of the policy . You get to the pearly gates , they look at your file , and they laugh at you because you made a $ 75,000 mistake for having this policy and never needed it . By the way , that amount is less than one year of facility care in todays dollars . Now , mistake number two . You decide to not get this policy and pay the premium . Twenty years from now , when you are 75 , you need care for just two years . You pay for the care out-of-pocket . Based on past trends , the average cost of future care will be about $ 350,000 . If you have to make a mistake , which mistake has the least impact on your family : the first one or the second one ? That is why top financial advisors and the federal and state government encourage people like you and I to look into LTCI . It is just common sense .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Your policy number is a number assigned to each individual policy to identify the policy that is associated with the owner of the policy . You will find your policy number located on your auto insurance ID card or declarations page . If you are unsure of your policy number I recommend you call your insurance provider and they can assist you in obtaining your policy number .
Because insurance primarily deals with `` pure risk '' , the chance of loss but not the chance for gain . The most effective way for a insurer toeffectivelymanage their own costs and to pay out on claims while still being profitable is through `` risk pooling '' which is the practice of grouping a large number ofhomogeneousand independent risks . By risk pooling those who subject the insurer to excessive claims should be off set by the policy holders who under use their policies . However the current market is notbalanced . . one of the goals of PPACA , therefore the majority of individuals who areseekinghealth coverage are the ones who are going to be mostlikelyto incur expensive claims . There are several other factors such as hospitals , when they extend charity care to poverty stricken individuals who need treatment they are forced to reconcile their budgets by charging more to the individuals who have the means to pay ... another area that PPACA aims to address .
Each company will have their own format for their policy numbers . Some use letters and numbers , while others will use a long series of numbers . If you are unsure , the best advise would be to call the insurance company you believe the policy belongs to and ask if it is one of their numbers .
Medicare numbers in most cases are your Social Security number plus a letter at the end . In some cases your Medicare number may be the Social Security number of your spouse . The letters at the end of your number designate your `` status '' as a Medicare beneficiary . A `` B '' at the end means you are retired . `` B1 '' means you are the spouse of a retired worker .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
There is no part of Medicare titled Part T. Medicare consists of 4 main parts - A , B , C , and D . There are also 10 Medigap plans -LRB- a.k.a. Medicare supplement plans -RRB- - A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Are you perhaps referring to your Medicare claim number ? Your claim number is your social security number plus a letter . The letter T is one of the common ending characters to a claim number . If you have a claim number ending in `` T '' , it designates that you are either uninsured , but entitled to Part A or are fully insured and have elected to only take Part A. I hope that answers your question . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Accidental Death and Dismemberment insurance -LRB- AD&D insurance -RRB- pays for death due to accident , such as falling down stairs or being in a car wreck . Life insurance pays for death due to accident AND natural causes , such as cancer or old age . The reason Accidental Death insurance usually costs less than Life insurance is because the number of people who die from accidents is a fraction of the number of people who pass from natural causes .
Sometimes life insurance policies get lost . If you have something with the name of the company , you can call the company and give them as much information as you can about the insured , social security number is very helpful , often they can find the policy in there files and send a duplicate . If you have the policy number then that is even better . If the company has been purchased by another company you may have to do some research or call the department of insurance to find out who purchased the company .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Who Can Apply For Medicare At Age 62 ?
If you 're not turning at least age 65 , you can only go on Medicare if you 're disabled or have ESRD -LRB- end-stage renal disease -RRB- and meet the under 65 Medicare qualifications . If you 're under 65 and qualify for Medicare Parts A & B , I would suggest looking into securing a Medicare supplement and Part D prescription drug plan or a Medicare Advantage plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
$ 250,000 of 20 year Term life insurance for a very healthy 62 year old male will run between $ 150 to $ 250 per month . At age 62 , selecting a shorter term will cut the rate down drastically . However , to get a term length beyond 30 year Term is very rare at age 62 . To get longer coverage , you most likely have to take Universal Life with a guarantee to not lapse before a certain age . Unless you absolutely know that you will only need your policy for a limited number of years , taking the Universal Life option is a much safer way to go . If you were to buy a 20 year Term policy , get cancer at age 81 , and then live to age 85 , you most likely will be unable to afford the annually renewable premiums AND be unable to qualify for the amount of life insurance you want . If you can qualify for Preferred rates at age 62 , chances are you are going to live a long time . It is easier to lock your rate in for a long time now , than it will be to get a new , affordable policy when the term runs out . So do n't cheat yourself ; get a policy that will still be in effect when you die .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
You can get Medicare if you have never worked if : 1 -RRB- You are a US citizen , have lived in the US for at least 5 continuous years , take both Medicare A and B , and pay the appropriate premium for Medicare Part A -LRB- up to $ 441/month in 2013 -RRB- ; or 2 -RRB- You are the spouse of a an eligible worker who is at least age 62 -LRB- for Part A ; you can enroll in Part B before your eligible spouse turns age 62 -RRB- ; 3 -RRB- Miscellaneous other circumstances .
You can indeed qualify for Medicare at age 62 ... as long as you are totally and permanently disabled under Social Security rules . If you have been disabled and on SSDI for 2 years you qualify for Medicare . If you have ESRD or ALS you can also qualify for SSDI and Medicare at age 62
If you are age 65 when you receive Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare at age 65 . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits , you can still sign up for Medicare benefits at age 65 . When relying on your spouse 's eligibility , you can get Medicare at age 65 if your spouse is at least age 62 .
If you are receiving Medicare and your spouse turns 65 , he/she can go on Medicare even if they have not paid Medicare taxes the required 40 quarters , due to being a stay at home worker or some other reason . If you have paid into Medicare but are not yet on Medicare , your spouse has not paid into Medicare , and your spouse turns 65 , he/she can receive Medicare if you are age 62 or older .
That is a great question ! The Medicare system was set up so that everyone could qualify for it , once they turned 65 years of age . There are no restrictions as to your health status - if you are perfectly healthy you qualify , if you have cancer you qualify . The age limitation is pretty solid though . You mentioned that you started taking your Social Security benefits at age 62 , and if you did so because of a disability that required retirement and early benefits , and have been steadily taking those disability benefits since then you may qualify for the early Medicare exemption . To qualify for it , you will have had to have continuously pulled benefits for two years , and you have passed that mark if so . If not , I 'm sorry to say that they are pretty strict about the age requirement , and you will be unable to sign up until you turn 65 . Good luck , and thank you for asking !
You must be age 65 to qualify for Medicare , with a few exceptions . Without elaboration , the main exceptions are : 1 -RRB- being on Social Security Disability for two years -LRB- so if you go on SSDI at age 62 or earlier , you will be able to go on Medicare before age 65 -RRB- , 2 -RRB- having end stage renal disease , or 3 -RRB- having Lou Gehrig 's disease .
If you are 65 or older , you can get Medicare Part A if you have n't worked , as long as your spouse or divorced spouse has worked enough hours to receive Medicare , and if your spouse or divorced spouse is at least age 62 . Also , you can get Medicare if you get Social Security . Getting Social Security benefits only requires a 10 year work history for you or a spouse , or less if the employed spouse dies at a very young age . There are some other caveats dealing with SSDI , railroad , kidney failure and more . See WEBSITELINK for more details .
Medicare is not optional to start at age 62 , as Social Security is . You can only get it at age 65 unless there is another reason for getting it before age 65 . Those reasons are : having end stage renal disease , being on Social Security Disability for 24 months , or having Lou Gehrig 's Disease .
Your current medical history does n't affect whether or not you would qualify for Medicare . In general , you must be 65 years or older to sign up for Medicare Part A & Part B . At age 62 , you would not be able to qualify for Medicare as you 're too young for the program - the only exception is if you are receiving social security disability benefits for more than 24 continuous months . If you 're receiving social security disability benefits , but have not met the 24 month rule , then you would not be eligible for Medicare . Please note , when you 're new to Medicare Part A and Part B , you activate a 6-month initial open enrollment period to also buy a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- with NO medical underwriting - meaning even with hep C , you can get one . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan . After your initial open enrollment period expires , you would be subject to medical questions for any Medigap plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions or need help with your Medicare Supplement coverage - you can reach me via the `` contact me '' button next to my picture . Thanks very much .
You can only go on Medicare at age 62 if : 1 -RRB- you have been receiving Social Security Disability Income -LRB- SSDI -RRB- benefits for two years , or 2 -RRB- if you have been diagnosed with End Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and meet the other qualifying criteria , or 3 -RRB- you have been diagnosed with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis -LRB- ALS -RRB- . Otherwise , you must wait until you are age 65 to go on Medicare .
If you have family history with a disposition for chronic illness or disease before age 50 , you should consider long term care insurance -LRB- LTCI -RRB- . You should start seriously reviewing the half dozen LTC contracts at age 50 and purchase LTCi while youre healthy and the premiums are inexpensive . But dont delay to purchase LTCi beyond age 62 .
The cost of one million dollars worth of life insurance depends on the length of coverage : term life insurance from 5-30 years or permanent life insurance to age 121 . But it also depends on your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition and whether the coverage is one one life or two . A million dollars of 20 year term life insurance on a male non smoker age 62 is around $ 10,000 annually .
There 's many factors that go into the costs for term life insurance to say what an average plan costs - it will be different for every person due to a number of factors including their age , amount of coverage they want , how long they want the coverage for -LRB- , their risk classifcation , and whether they 're applying with full underwriting or non-medical term coverage . At age 62 , you 'll have term life insurance options for 10 , 15 , 20 , or 25 years - 30 years term insurance would not be available due to age - you would need to look at permanent programs to secure coverage longer than 25 years . If you want to consider coverage beyond 25 years , I would suggest looking at a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- If you 're looking for something in the $ 100,000 , 10yr term insurance range , you could be looking at premiums of about $ 35 per month to over $ 100 + per month . $ 250,000 , 15 yr term can be as low as $ 103 per month . So on and so forth . However , any numbers I quote without more details regarding your medical history will be useless . The risk classification is the MOST critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Please keep in mind - every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- . Consulting with an experienced life insurance broker would be the best course of action . Brokers can shop the case for you among a number of carrier to see which one will work best for your program and help you structure a policy that will best serve your needs and your budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Conventional wisdom is no later than age 50 when the potential morbidity events begin to increase and at age 62 for price considerations . Establishing a long term care insurance policy is part of defensive retirement planning and should be a high priority based on life expectancy and the average cost fo extended care during your senior years .
Most financial advisers start addressing long term care insurance at age 50 . But the purchasing trends of long term care insurance are age 62 . Its critical to purchase long term care insurance when you healthy and young enough to pay reasonable premiums for coverage , especially if your family has a predisposition for extended care confinement .
There are schools of thought that purchasing long term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- early on when youre healthy is the ideal time to buy LTCi . Conventional wisdom is no later than age 50 when the potential morbidity events begin to increase and at age 62 for price considerations . Establishing a long term care insurance policy is part of defensive retirement planning and should be a high priority based on life expectancy and the average cost for extended care during your senior years .
Your Medicare number is on your Medicare card . For most people it is their Social Security number followed by a letter . The letter A means you are a wage earner . The letter B means you are the spouse of a wage earner and you are 62 or older . In some cases your Medicare number will be your spouses SSN .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Blackout Period In Life Insurance ?
There is no blackout period in life insurance . The term , `` blackout period '' refers to the period of time when a widow or widower are left without income because they can not draw on their deceased spouse 's Social Security benefits -LRB- due to their children no longer being dependents , and the surviving spouse not yet old enough to draw on their own Social Security -RRB- . Some survivors use life insurance proceeds as income during this time .
There is no such term as a `` blackout period '' as it pertains to life insurance . The period you may be referring to is the contestability period . The contestability period is the first two years a life insurance policy is put into force . During this period of time , if the insured was to die , the insurance company can investigate the cause of death for misrepresentation , suicide or prudent care . This is common on ll life insurance companies policies .
There is no blackout period in life insurance . The term , `` blackout period '' refers to the period of time when a widow or widower are left without income because they can not draw on their deceased spouse 's Social Security benefits -LRB- due to their children no longer being dependents , and the surviving spouse not yet old enough to draw on their own Social Security -RRB- . Some survivors use life insurance proceeds as income during this time .
There is no such term as a `` blackout period '' as it pertains to life insurance . The period you may be referring to is the contestability period . The contestability period is the first two years a life insurance policy is put into force . During this period of time , if the insured was to die , the insurance company can investigate the cause of death for misrepresentation , suicide or prudent care . This is common on ll life insurance companies policies .
Most companies will have a medical question referring to it or similar . Had a customer black out due to low blood sugar and carrier was refusing to pay due to disclosure failure . Had another customer who was blind in one eye . That carrier did not have a medical question about that -LRB- only diabetes -RRB- . customer never had a wreck with the good eye ... can not say the same for the other . He said it was not his fault he did not see it coming -LRB- did not turn his neck far around enough to look -- carrier did pay . Usually if the car is adapted for a disability no problem . They have not figured out how to adapt for blackouts for high or low sugar.Did have one customer upset that a carrier would not insure her , she explained that she only had seizures at night and saw no reason why she could not drive in the daytime .
Similar to disability income insurance , long-term care insurance has an `` elimination period '' . This is like a `` time deductible '' during which one has to pay out-of-pocket for care costs while satisfying the elimination period . Elimination periods are chosen by the applicant and are usually 30 - , 60 - , 90 - , 180 - , or 365-days . The longer the elimination period , the lower the premium.Some carriers provide a 0-day elimination period for home care , either as part of the policy or as an extra-cost add-on rider . If a person goes on claim at home , they may receive approved claim payments -LRB- reimbursement plan -RRB- or cash -LRB- indemnity plan -RRB- as soon as they are declared eligible for payment by the carrier . The contract indicates what the insured needs to submit to the carrier in order to be approved for payment of care costs or to receive a cash payout.There are two ways an elimination period may be satisfied : - Service Days . The insured must pay for care on any given day in order to satisfy one day of the elimination period . For example , the insured has chosen a 90 day elimination period . The insured must pay for long-term care services out-of-pocket for a total of 90 days -LRB- they do not have to be consecutive -RRB- before the elimination period is satisfied . If the person is paying for home care , satisfying the elimination period could take longer than 90 consecutive days if care is not needed on any given day or days . Carriers may have different ways of calculating the fulfillment of the elimination period using the `` service days '' method . - Calendar days . The elimination period is satisfied when a majority of days during the elimination period required care and the insured paid out of pocket . In other words , the insured does not have satisfy the elimination period with days where services were paid out of pocket . Each carrier defines how the elimination period is satisfied using the calendar day method . This method is often offered as an additional cost rider.If a person goes immediately into a full-service nursing facility , the elimination period will be fulfilled as care is received . All facility care will need to be paid out-of-pocket by the insured or the insured 's family during that period of time . It wo n't matter that much which type of elimination fulfillment method is used in such a case unless the person leaves the facility before the elimination period is fully satisfied.Some carriers do not offer a calendar day method for satisfying the elimination period . Some have a choice between the two . Some carriers only have a calendar day elimination period . Once the elimination period is satisfied in full , it does not have to be satisfied again . Since the way a carrier allows for the fulfillment of the elimination period can be the difference in hundreds - if not thousands - of dollars in out-of-pocket payments , the prospect for long-term care insurance should make this a priority question before choosing a carrier . Be sure that you read the section of a specimen or sample policy on `` Payment of Claims '' so that you understand how the proposed insurance company defines `` when long-term insurance kicks in '' .
Medicare Part B has several enrollment periods that you should be aware of . The enrollment period that you may qualify for may vary based on what your current situation is . The first Medicare Part B enrollment period that most people experience is the `` Initial Enrollment Period '' . This is a 7 month window that starts 6 months before the first day of the month in which you turn 65 and lasts 6 months after the month in which you turn 65 . If you enroll in Part B using this enrollment period your medicare Part B will start on the first day of the month you turn 65 or if you enroll after your 65 birthday your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month . The Part B `` General Enrollment Period '' is for individuals over 65 that do not currently have medicare part B or other creditable health coverage . This period is from Jan 1st through march 31st every year . If you enroll in part B using this General Enrollment Period your Part B coverage will start on July 1st of the same year . There is also a `` Special Enrollment Period '' that begins 63 days before and ends 63 days after the date you lost creditable health coverage from an active employer . You may also qualify for an 8 month Enrollment period that begins on the day you lose employment and/or employment based group health coverage .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Your Life Insurance policy will have the specifics of the `` Grace Period '' that provides and cushion for you when you miss a payment . Life Insurance companies usually want youto keep you policy . Their Grace Period is usually 30 to 60 days depending on the policy and the company . The type of policy will make a difference as well . A Term Life Insurance policy does not have any `` Cash Value '' or a side account that can grow at an interest rate like a savings account and cover the missed premium . This `` Cash Value '' is a feature of a Universal Life policy . The Term Life policy would be in danger of lapsing much quicker and you are probably going to cancelled quicker . A Universal Life policy with cash value is going to use the saving portion to pay the premium . The Universal Life will lapse once the cash value is depleted and the grace period expires . You can call your agent or Life Insurance company and work out options on the Universal Life policy such as lower the `` Face Amount '' or amount of death benefit to help you make the policy last longer . `` Whole Life Insurance '' will have a grace period as well . Coverage options beyond the grace period become more complicated . This Whole Life policy also has a `` Cash Value '' or savings portion as well . You will be subject to the policy 's `` Non Forfeiture Options '' within the policy . These options are different for each policy . You will have to check your policy . Usually , there are 3 options : Return of the cash value to you minus any loans you took out , you can change to a lower amount of insurance that is `` Paid Up '' or you do not have to pay premiums for the amount of death benefit , or you can change to a `` Term Life Insurance '' policy for a specific period of time then the insurance stops .
This refers to a term life insurance policy and the time period that the policy at the quoted rates would remain in effect . As its name implies , term life insurance , runs for a stated period of time -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 year terms -RRB- . If at the end of that time period the policy holder has not died then the policy ends and the insurance carrier keeps all premiums paid during the life of the policy . A 10-Year Term Life policy means a policy that will cover the policyholder for a period of 10-years at the rates quoted or subject to whatever rate terms as associated with the policy . For example , a person might purchasea $ 50,000 10-year Term Life Insurance policy which would mean that if the policyholder kept their policy paid up and died during that 10-year coverage period the life insurance company would pay $ 50,000 to the person 's beneficiary . Term life insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance and builds up no cash value as opposed to permanent life insurance which is more expensive . Many people use a combination of term and permanent life insurance to protect them and their families for the financial risk of the death of the policyholder at different stages in their life . For example , a man in his 40 's with a mortgage and children getting ready for college may have need for more life insurance than he will when he is 65 , retired and an empty nester . Proper structuring of a life insurance portfolio over the course of a person 's life can help achieve this goal most cost effectively .
The elimination period in long term care insurance is the number of days that you must wait after long-term care begins before the policy will start to pay benefits . This is also called a waiting period . Most policies offer a choice of elimination period lengths . Common choices are , for example , 0 days , 20 days , 50 days , or 100 days . Typically , the shorter the waiting period , the higher the premium will be for the policy . Ask to see how the elimination period works for the policy you are considering as some policies have a once-in-a-lifetime waiting period while other policies require that a new waiting period begins each time a new period of care begins .
Long term disability begins after satisfying the policy elimination period . Every policy is different . The elimination period describes the length of time you must be disabled and under the care of a physician , before benefit payments begin . You choose the elimination period at time of purchase . Short elimination periods have higher premiums , than longer elimination periods . Check your policy to determine what elimination period fit your budget .
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
That is an interesting question . I assume you ask because someone presented the idea to you . Annuities are a kind of insurance product and are sold / issued by life insurance companies . Annuities are either `` life certain '' or `` period certain '' . If it is ` life certain ' the annuity will pay out a specified amount per payment period for as long as the annuitant lives . If it is ` period certain ' it will pay out for the length of the determined period regardless if the annuitant lives longer or dies before the period ends . If the annuitant dies before the period ends their beneficiary will receive the balance of the payments . Another idea that could be expressed as a life insurance annuity is when the death benefit of a life insurance policy is set up to be annuitised to the beneficiary . That is the death benefit would be used to purchase an annuity for the beneficiary .
Just a quick note as I read another post and need to clarify an incorrect statement regarding elimination periods . YOU are NOT reimbursed for your choice of elimination period . If you choose a 60 day elimination period , your benefits start on the 61st day and payment is usually made on the 91st day and monthly there after . You are not compensated for your choice of elimination period . The elimination period is like choosing your deductible on your health , home or auto insurance . It is the time you are willing to self insure your situation . You are not compensated for your choice of elimination period . Your choice of elimination period effects your premiums .
I am not sure what you mean by `` functions '' . Disability insurance is designed to pay a percentage of your income , usually between 60 % and 80 % if you become disabled due to an injury or accident . You choose an elimination period which acts as a deductible . The elimination period is the period of time that goes by after you become disabled before the insurance begins to pay . The longer the elimination period the lower the premium . Each company has options as far as the elimination period , most common for Short Term disability might seven days sickness and zero days accident but this can vary according to circumstances . Short Term disability will provide income for the period of time specified in the policy , usually not more than a year or two , but again , that varies .
What is elimination period in long term care insurance ? The elimination period is the amount of time you choose to self insure the situation before the long term care insurance kicks in to cover costs . The elimination period gives you options about how soon your long term care kicks in . The shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium . If you can extend your elimination period , usually you 'll see a considerable reduction in cost .
The other respondents explain that two basic triggers exist within common liability coverage policies . It is important to realize that most personal insurance - auto , home , motorcycle , rv - are based upon the occurrence trigger in the insurance policy . An occurrence is an event including repeated exposures to the same condition , that cause loss covered by the policy . You 'll understand that if the loss `` occurs '' during the policy period , the loss is coverable and a duty to defend exists until such time as it is determined after further investigation that coverage is not provided by the policy . At that time the carrier would probably extend a `` reservation of rights '' letter to you to notify you that the investigation of the loss events are revealing to the carrier that the loss is not covered for some reason contained within the policy or due to the events that occurred . Nevertheless , if the loss `` occurs '' during the period the policy was effective , and barring exclusions and limitations , their is coverage in an occurrence policy . A `` claims made '' policy changes what triggers the benefits of the policy . In the case of claims made coverage , generally only written on business and professional liability exposures , the trigger is the event and when it occurred . What is different now is that the claims must be first made during the period of coverage or a subsequent policy . If a claim is permitted to be made on subsequent policies , the chain of coverage needs to be uninterrupted and the `` retroactive '' date for coverage to be set to a point before the actual date of the loss . Claims Made policies were designed to help eliminate the chance that years and years of coverage on an occurrence policy could not be stacked one upon the other to generate large amounts of coverage . In the case of claims made policies , only the current policy limit is exposed to loss and not a stack of limits from policies covering prior annual periods . One other point that is necessary to understand . Generally , there are limitations on how long after a policy is cancelled for a claim to be presented . Occurrence policies are much more accommodating here . On the other hand , claims made policies have a limited period of time after the policy ends for a claim to be made . This is referred to as extended discovery and extended discovery on otherwise unendorsed policies is only 60 days . That is , you only have sixty days to present a claim for coverage at the end of a claims made policy . Additional extended periods of discovery are available at additional cost but each carrier may have different periods of discovery available . This feature on a claims made policy provides the `` tail '' of coverage that an occurrence policy includes without additional charge . A `` tail '' is the time beyond the period of coverage where a claim may be first reported or appear on the books of the carrier . Liability type losses can have a long `` tail '' due to the nature of the coverage and potential loss . Property losses , on the other hand , generally have short `` tails '' where the loss is not known . The reserve that the carrier must maintain within its accounting for these losses is not as the IBNR -LRB- incurred but not reported -RRB- loss reserve . Over time the carrier reduces this reserve in recognition that the further past the end of a policy that they travel , the less likely a loss has occurred or will be reported . This should help you understand just how much must taken into account to answer your generalized question . I hope this helps answer your question .
The elimination period is chosen at the time of application for the DI policy and represents a kind of `` time deductible '' that must be fulfilled before a claim is paid . The clock starts ticking when the carrier is informed in writing by a medical professional that the insured person has suffered a debilitating accident , developed a medical condition , or contracted a serious illness that is likely to last longer than the elimination period chosen . Thefirst dayof fulfillment of the elimination period typically begins at the date-of-onset of the debilitating event , although that actual date-of-onset is subject to the decision of the insurance company after reviewing medical records . Claims , i.e. a check for the maximum monthly benefit for income replacement , would usually not arrive until 30 days after the completion of the elimination period . For example , say the injured or sick insured has a 90-day elimination period . The income replacement check would arrive 30 days later , or 120 days from the date-of-onset . In the meantime , the insured would be responsible for paying bills during that four month period . So , serious discussion needs to take place at application time about how long of an elimination period should be applied for understanding that reality . The insured shouldmake sure that a liquid asset account be available at all times for such expenses , and/or a short-term DI policy should be in place , and/or a sufficient amount of sick leave and vacation be saved up , or a combination of all those accommodations .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How Can I Get Long Term Care Insurance Online In New York ?
To get Long Term Care Insurance online in New York , go to a Long Term Care , Life Insurance , or Health Insurance website that sells Long Term Care Insurance from a variety of carriers . You can call them and they will walk you through the process of applying .
No , Health Insurance DOES NOT cover Long Term Care . Long Term Care needs to be covered through either Long Term Care Insurance , or a Unique Product offered by New York Life called Asset Preserver . New York Life can provide you with Long Term Care Insurance in an extremely large variety of personalized policies , or an Asset Protector which will provide you with Both Life Insurance and Long Term Care in one product . Please call me , Gary Lane , New York Life Agent , for the details that can fit your exact needs .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
To get Long Term Care Insurance online in New York , go to a Long Term Care , Life Insurance , or Health Insurance website that sells Long Term Care Insurance from a variety of carriers . You can call them and they will walk you through the process of applying .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
To buy life insurance in New York , you can go to a website that offers it , look through your Yellow Pages and call an agency , or ask friends , relatives or co-workers for a referral . When purchasing online , you can use the quote engines and put in New York to see if they offer policies there . New York has its own companies so not every agency does business there .
New York Homeowners Insurance cost will depend on what is being insured . Home Insurance covers the replacement cost of the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal liability and medical payments to others . The age , size and construction characteristics of the home will dictate the reconstruction cost which will be used as the Dwelling Coverage Amount . If you are looking for a lower premium than generated , we would recommend selecting a higher deductible option . The deductible does not apply to Liability and Medical Payment claims ; however , it is the amount deducted from a loss payout for physical loss to the dwelling , other structures and/or personal property as covered on the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy New York Home Insurance online ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The state of New York is one of the most highly regulated states in the country . Residents of New York general pay more for coverage . It 's critical in securing the best possible price tag by going online to a brokerage firm that has an extension inventory of New York approved careers to secure the best deal .
Car insurance rates in New York are determined by many variables . Some of the most important factors are your driving record -LRB- including other family members -RRB- , your zip code or county , your age , the type of vehicle you drive , your credit history , how the vehicle is used and the types of coverage you carry . Additionally , the company you are insured with plays a big role in determining the rates . So ... how do you get a free quote for car insurance in New York ? A reputable nationwide -LRB- or New York based -RRB- car insurance website will zoom -LRB- pun intended -RRB- you to your destination . Typically , you can compare the best offers and get expert advice at no cost .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
Matt is correct . New York Life is an independent national insurance company . We are a mutual company , meaning our policy holders own our company , and we are not beholden to Stock Holders , so we can have lower rates and better service . In addition to Term Policies , we offer our flagship Whole Life Policies , along with Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities , Pension Replacements , College Funding , a variety of Retirement Plans . For details , call a New York Life Agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
New York Life has relationships with a number of other quality insurance companies to offer many products , including disability insurance . Through these arrangements , customers can work with a New York Life agent to obtain a wide variety of products not underwritten by New York Life itself . Disability insurance can provide peace of mind and removes the uncertainty in case of an accident or sickness that makes someone incapable of working . When considering such coverage , one should review both short term and long term options . Business should also consider Disability insurance for key business persons in the business .
No , they do not . New York Life Insurance is not in the health insurance business . New York Life Insurance focuses on life and disability insurance , long-term care insurance , annuities and retirement planning as well financial services . They have a long and distinguished history but are not a health insurance resource .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Why Has Health Insurance Gone Up ?
Health Insurance rates have gone up because the cost of care has gone up . Insurance companies must now provide benefits that were not covered before . Cost of prescriptions and the over prescribing of medications by some physicians add to those costs Starting in 2014 insurance companies will have to accept pre-existing conditions which will increase claim payments dramatically . Insurance premiums must go up to compensate for these increased costs .
My advice is to keep your Term policy until the time when premiums go up -LRB- usually , at the end of the term -RRB- . The exception would be if your health improved , you lost a lot of weight , quit smoking , or something else that would allow you to get a better rate on a new policy . Once the rate jumps up and goes into annually renewable term , the price gets so high that it is unsustainable for long . Some situations that might prompt you to keep it for a while is if you are terminally ill or have a very short need for which buying a new policy would be more of a hassle than it is worth . It is far better to convert the policy before the price jumps up and the conversion privilege ends . You will get a lot more for your money to convert it to permanent than pay the annually renewable rates . As far as dropping your Term policy when the need ends , one need usually replaces another , and when that good rate is gone , it is gone . You will be surprised at how much more it will cost you to get that coverage back just due to being older . If you have been diagnosed with a serious health problem in the meantime -LRB- and is n't that why a lot of people seek life insurance , because they have just been faced with their own mortality -RRB- , you may not be able to get a new Term policy at all . So I would give it a lot of thought before dropping any Term policy unless it is to get a better policy at a lower rate , or to switch it to something permanent .
Is Whole life insurance worth buying ? Well the answer is going to vary by the individual as people see worth differently . To me a decades old owner of whole life , all I can do is tell you why I purchased whole life . I liked the idea of owning the policy with a set price that can not be changed . I liked the terms of ownership did n't or could n't be changed over time . I like the steady boring returns to cash values that these policies produced . While my real estate , stock market and other investments have gone up and down , in many cases very dramatically , my boring whole life has done what it said it would . My whole life has NEVER gone backwards in value , it grows in good markets and bad ones . Is whole life the only thing you should purchase , well no . A good portfolio is a diverse portfolio . Whole life should be a part of it , but not all of it . Owning a whole life allows you to take risks elsewhere as you have a safety net .
Harry Crosby , a long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCI -RRB- agent , coach and trainer , has one of the best answers to this question that I know of . It 's called `` The Two Mistakes '' . In the interest of space , I have edited his take on this important question : There are really only two mistakes you can make with long-term care insurance . Mistake number one : You get one of these plans . It doesnt matter which one . You buy a plan , pay every year , live a long happy and healthy life , die in your sleep with a smile on your face and the money you paid in is gone . Right . The money you paid in is gone . Had you known that this would be the case , you would never have purchased a long-term carepolicy . Mistake number two : You stay self-insured , which is what you are doing right now . Then you -LRB- and possibly your spouse -RRB- need care . Not only do you pay for it yourself out-of-pocket , but the rest of the burden is placed on your family . Lets look at the two mistakes . Mistake number one is that you get this plan , and your premium is about $ 2,500 a year . You live another 30 years , and at age 85 you die in your sleep with a smile on your face never needing a day of care and thus never getting a dime out of the policy . You get to the pearly gates , they look at your file , and they laugh at you because you made a $ 75,000 mistake for having this policy and never needed it . By the way , that amount is less than one year of facility care in todays dollars . Now , mistake number two . You decide to not get this policy and pay the premium . Twenty years from now , when you are 75 , you need care for just two years . You pay for the care out-of-pocket . Based on past trends , the average cost of future care will be about $ 350,000 . If you have to make a mistake , which mistake has the least impact on your family : the first one or the second one ? That is why top financial advisors and the federal and state government encourage people like you and I to look into LTCI . It is just common sense .
There could be several reasons why your homeowners insurance has gone up . One could be the amount of coverage has increased due to rising costs of construction . One could be your home is getting older . If you had a newer home you were afforded discounts that may be diminishing . Did you have a claim would be another reason . Or it just could be losses in your area have increased and this effects the whole . I would review your policy with your agent to make sure you are maximizing all available discounts .
What do you want it for and what to protect ? Is it for a temporary need , like until the mortgage is paid off , or the kids through school ? Or for your spouse at your death ? Term insurance can be bought for twenty or even thirty years , it is fairly low cost , but when its gone its gone . Permanent life will last to your death , and the premiums will not go up , it accumulates cash value , and can be borrowed against . If you stop paying for your term , it will be gone in 30 days , but with permanent , if you miss a payment , it can be paid from your accumulated value . Permanent can be either whole life or universal life . Universal can be tied to some stock index , and go up a bit more than whole , but may also drop to a certain point . How much risk do you want ? Your decision . Of course with indexed universal , there are some protections at the bottom end , which cost you some of the top end performance . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Wow , people keep asking this question . Does n't anybody get married anymore ? No , you ca n't add your girlfriend to your healthinsurance , she 's not a legal dependent . Girlfriends and boyfriends have a tendency to come into and then drift out of our lives . That 's why they are referred to as friends . Husbands and wives on the other hand have this certain `` stickiness '' and tend to hang around for a long time . Maybe even until death do you part . The bottom line is if you think so highly of your girlfriend that you want to put her on your health insurance then it 's time to make it legal . Of course , now in the era of ObamaCare even marrying her may not be a guarantee you can add her to your employer 's health insurance . Interestingly enough , ObamaCare did n't bother to define spouses as dependents -LRB- I did n't make the law folks I just inform people about it -RRB- and so with health insurance rates skyrocketing you are seeing increasing numbers of employers requiring spouses who are employed at another company that offers health insurance to enroll in their employer 's plan . And a few have gone all in on that interpretation of the law and are n't covering spouses at all -LRB- still pretty rare -RRB- . But , in general , you have to be married to your girlfriend to cover her as a dependent on your health insurance .
The death benefit is usually income tax free to the beneficiary . The reason why I say usually is because there are a few circumstances where the benefit would be taxable . If the death benefit is paid out in installment payments and is gaining interest , the beneficiary would have to pay taxes on the interest earned . The beneficiary of a life insurance policy receives a lump sum of money from the insurance company that is not included as income . The applicant does not pay any taxes on their premium payments as well . Life insurance also skips probate court . Probate court is the court that deals with distribution of assets after one passes . Most individuals have their assets tied up in probate from six months to over two years . Walt Disney passed away in 1966 his estate is still in probate . Nobody has access to the individuals estate until it has gone through the probate court . Life insurance bypasses the probate process and goes to the beneficiary income tax free in most cases .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
The cash surrender value is the portion of your insurance that you have built up your own money in . Whole-life insurance by design is really like a reducing term policy with a cash account that builds guaranteed cash value as you get further and further into the policy years . All whole-life policies have a maturity date where your cash has built up to the point that you are completely self insured and the actual insured portion -LRB- the part the insurance company has at risk -RRB- has gone to zero . You can use your cash value while you are living through policy loans , cash surrenders , or using it to buy reduced paid up insurance .
Another way to think about this question is , `` How much woulda disabling event cost you without coverage ? '' Considering Brandon 's well-thought out response to you , also thinking about the question from the darker side makes many of us uneasy inside though . -LSB- I do n't like to think something like that can happen , but it does . -RSB- From personal experience , I can tell you that disability insurance and critical illness insurance has a very real place in anyone 's planning who has a paycheck and depends on that paycheck for their living . Period . I am now 42 years old and at the age of 27 I delivered a very healthy baby girl - went home from the hospital after 4 days like normaland on the 5th day had a pulmonary embolism that locked up both of my lungs almost to the point of death . So instead of being gone from my job for 8 weeks on maternity leave , I was gone for almost 5 months . Without my DI and CI policies , it would have been a financially crippling event for my family . It was not expected - but it unfortunately happened . Brandon shared some very realistic numbers here for consideration . I applaud anyone looking into these ancillary policies to protect their planning . Sheryl Brown / @AshBrokerage
Great question ! There are a couple of reasons why your policy costs have gone up . The policy you have may have a clause that allows for an adjustment for price each year to match inflation , or rising home values . You may have filed a claim , or cancelled another policy that you had with that company that had allowed a discount , that is now no longer applied . If you live in an area where fires or natural disasters have just occurred , the company may be seeking to recapture lost profits from paid claims . Thanks for asking !
That 's a great question ! Let 's answer it this way : How would you be financially if you purchase your home , take out a big mortgage to pay for it , buy new furniture and appliances to fill the house , get all of your belongings in it , and then it catches fire and is gone ? Would you be able to start from scratch and repay the mortgage ? Or how about if a visitor fell down some steps in your home , and had to be hospitalized . Would you be able to pay the bills and possible law suit damages that you are liable for ? These are two really good reasons why homeowners is important , and most lenders will not sign off on your mortgage unless their investment is protected somehow . I hope that helps you decide to insure your home . Thank you for asking !
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
The answer to your question will vary depending upon the health insurance company you are enrolling with , whether your coverage is through an employer or is individual health insurance , and increasingly with the time of year you are enrolling . If you are enrolling through your employer 's plan then it is reasonable to expect that it will take 5 to 10 business days for you to receive your new member packet with your physical ID card . Many group health insurance carriers have the functionality through their web sites for your HR person or for you to be able to print out a temporary ID card within 24 to 48 hours of their receiving and processing your enrollment form . For persons taking out individual health insurance it is usually around 10 business days after receiving your application that your new member kit with your ID card will be mailed to you . Some individual carriers also provide for the production of temporary ID cards from their web site after your enrollment form has been processed . When an individual is enrolling in individual health insurance during the annual open enrollment period you should understand that our nation has now gone to a system that forces people to enroll in a prescribed time period each year . Millions of people are being processed during this period and it strains the capacity of even the largest health insurance companies to process this volume of enrollments that are coming from both the government based health insurance marketplaces and from direct enrollments . While the process should get better with time , the first year 's open enrollment left much to be desired from an efficiency standpoint and the consumer should be prepared for longer waiting times to get their ID cards following open enrollment . In 2014 waiting times of well over a month were not uncommon and in some instances the waiting periods some people experienced were even longer .
That is an interesting question . I 've been an agent for many years , and I can speak from experience when I tell you that price is not based on color . I do not work with any companies -LRB- and I work with many -RRB- that would even consider breaking the law that way . That said , there are some things that come into play that might make you think -LRB- wrongly , I promise you -RRB- that It may cost more for African Americans . Life insurance costs are based in great part upon risk factors , including high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity . These factors , along with heart disease are statistically common among all Americans , but much more so among African Americans . The American Heart Association in an article released last September suggests that a gene found in African Americans may be the cause for the highest rates of hypertension in the world . This disease is the leading cause of heart disease -LRB- # 1 killer of Americans -RRB- and strokes -LRB- # 4 killer -RRB- . Their article also outlines problems with obesity -LRB- 63 % of men , 77 % of women over 20 years old -RRB- among the community , as well as higher rates of diabetes -LRB- 2x as likely as whites to have it , among those 20 and older 15 % have the disease -RRB- . The US Dept. of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health documents higher rates of cancers among the African American community in 2009 research , as well as higher mortality rates . Insurance companies are n't as concerned about the causes and reasons behind the statistics , as much as the heath issues of the applicants . If you are of any race , your rate will be higher if you suffer from diabetes or hypertension , especially if it has gone uncontrolled . The life expectancy of anyone with those issues is shortened , and so the companies bear more risk , and as a result charge more . The better the health , the cheaper the rates might be a simple way to put it , since the risk to the company determines the rate they will charge to insure you . If you smoke , expect to pay more . If you are overweight , expect to pay more . This will be true regardless of race , where you live , or the amount of coverage you apply for . I hope that this helps you understand how the industry works , and why it might seem like it is unfair . Thanks for asking !
Unless you have no family , no friends , no religious affiliation , and no charity or cause that you believe in , you probably should have life insurance . All of the above are reasons to want to leave money after you are gone . You also want funds available for your own burial , trusting someone or some group to handle that for you -LRB- final expenses -RRB- . If you have a spouse , kids , mortgage , think about handling those after you are gone . There are very few folks who do not truly need life insurance . Thank you . GARY LANE .
If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
Is whole life ever a good idea ? Absolutely , for those who understand it 's application and use , it makes great sense . For those who always want to compare it to a stock mutual fund that never ever does anything but go up , well , it shows that they really do n't have a good understanding of how RISK applies to financial choices . I own whole life for many years now . It has served me well , done what I have expected it to do and even better it has never gone backwards like my qualified plan investments have or my real estate investments have . Whole life insurance is a solidly boring financial product that serves a good purpose in a portfolio . It is part of a portfolio , a boring part , but if you 've been around long enough and put money in different places , you 'll understand the need to have something like whole life . Some choices should n't keep you up at night .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Can I Lower My Auto Insurance Rates ?
There are a few different ways that you can lower your auto insurance rates . Possibility number one is lowering your coverage levels -LRB- not recommended as this can leave you exposed to greater liability -RRB- . Possibility number two if you have n't already done so combine your homeowners and auto coverage under one company -LRB- most offer multi-policy discounts -RRB- . Possibility number three is shopping around every company has it own levels of risk tolorence -LRB- if your confortable with your agent and the company that you are with already - it may be worth the extra cost for the peace of mind -RRB- .
If you are looking to lower your auto insurance rates , the first thing that I would suggest if you have a homeowners or renters policy and it is not with the same carrier as your auto insurance then you may want to purchase that coverage from your auto insurance carrier to be able to possibly get an additional discount for having multiple policies with the same carrier . You could also look into lowering your coverage amounts or raising your deductibles .
If you want to lower your insurance premium you could raise your deductibles for your comprehensive and collision coverages on your auto policy . Another way would be if you do not have your home owners and auto insurance coverage with the same carrier , you may be able to receive a discount on both policies if you swich both policies to the same carrier .
If you want to lower your auto insurance rates there are a few different things that you can do to achieve this . The first would be to raise your deductilbles if you have collision and other than collision -LRB- comprehensive -RRB- coverage on your vehicle . You could possibly lower your liability coverage amounts this could also lower your rates . Another way would be to have multiple policies with the same carrier .
There are short term ways or quick ways to lower your rates such as packaging a home or renters insurance policy with your auto insurance if your company has both . Rates these days are really driven by the company base rates and you individually . Some of the factors that will effect your rates is credit , your driving history , the length of time you have been insured , zip codes , age , marital status and your claim history . Many companies have rates in `` a black box '' so other factors at times are hard for agents to explain . If you have not done so I recommend contacting an independent agent so they can shop for you different companies and find which one fits best for you on both coverage and price . Good Luck
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Many factors can keep your auto insurance rates down . First would be a clean driving record . No moving violations in the last 3 years and no at-fault accidents . The longer your driving record is clean the better as some insurance carriers discount if clean for 5-7 years . Being married tends to lower your rate . Packaging polices such as home and umbrella tend to lower auto insurance rates . If your a student having a 3.0 or better will lower your rate . Making sure there is no gaps in your insurance will also help to get you a better rate depending on the state you reside in . Credit is another factor for some states and of course the type of car you drive , how many miles you drive annually and coverage 's you select all are factors in your rate . Insurance coverage is consultative which is why I recommend you talk to a local independent agent who can help find you the right coverage 's at the right premium .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
There are many factors in rates for insurance . Your rates are not only determined by your driving habits and type of car and your age . there are things that make rates increase such as how many people in your area have accidents and duis and also things like Sandy and Katrina . Things to lower your rates are things like deductibles , however high deductible will lower your rates but not by much when you take in to the fact that going from 100 deductible on comprehensive to 1000 may save a you a few dollars in a month can you come up with 1000 in the event of a loss ? Not many can . Also lowering Liability limits but this is not a good choice either in the event of an accident will you have enough coverage ? My best suggestion is to shop around call in independent insurance agent they can compare rates with many carriers
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Variable Annuities Insured ?
A variable annuity is a security investment under FINRA and an insurance product under the department of Insurance of each state . Variable annuity separate sub accounts have equity and bond investments and can lose money . The guaranteed general account is a fixed interest rate which can vary . A variable annuity contract is not insured by any government agency .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
A non-qualified , tax deferred fixed rate annuity is only as guaranteed as the contract provisions outline and is only as good as the annuity insurance company that issued the contract . That being said , many financial stable annuity insurance companies offer a non-qualified tax deferred fixed rate annuities , generally at 5 , 7 and 10 year periods . A non-qualified , tax deferred variable annuity is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . ;
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals .
A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
Products , in and of themselves , dont present a good value or a bad value . Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
Variable annuities are only good for people with a high level of risk tolerance . Variable annuities can lose money , as well as , gain money . Hence , the term variable . When looking at variable annuities make sure you understand the risks involved . There are some great agents that can help you decide if these investments are the best fit for your tolerance and situation . There are other annuities that do not pay as much interest but are safer . For example , some annuities offer `` floors '' . Every annuity has some pros and cons so just make sure you understand the contract .
The annuity offerings change all the time . The best today maybe not be the best tomorrow . Annuities are categorized into basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Sentinel is a very good fixed interest rate annuity company . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Genworth is a very good index annuity company . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money . Prudential is a very good variable annuity company .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Cover Hospice In A Nursing Home ?
Yes ! Depending on your condition , you may get hospice care in a Medicare-approved hospice facility , hospital , nursing home , or other long-term care facility . The hospice benefit with Medicare allows you and your family to stay together in the comfort of your home unless you need care in an inpatient facility . If the hospice team determines that you need inpatient care , the hospice team will make the arrangements for your stay . Hospice care is intended for people with 6 months or less to live if the disease runs its normal course . You can get hospice care for two 90-day benefit periods , followed by an unlimited number of 60-day benefit periods . A benefit period starts the day you begin to get hospice care and it ends when your 90-day or 60-day period ends . You have the right to change providers only once during each benefit period At the start of each period , the hospice medical director or other hospice doctor must re-certify that youre terminally ill , so you can continue to get hospice care . If you live longer than 6 months , you can still get hospice care , as long as the hospice medical director or other hospice doctor re-certifies that you 're terminally ill . You can read more details about Hospice Care & Medicare on my blog at WEBSITELINK
You can get Medicare hospice benefits under Part A when you meet all of these conditions : Youre eligible for Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- . Your doctor and the hospice medical director certify thatyoure terminally ill and have 6 months or less to live if yourillness runs its normal course . You sign a statement choosing hospice care instead of otherMedicare-covered benefits to treat your terminal illness . -LRB- Medicare will still pay for covered benefits for any healthproblems that arent related to your terminal illness . -RRB- You get care from a Medicare-approved hospice program . Hospice care is intended for people with 6 months or less to live if the disease runs its normal course . If you live longer than 6 months , you can still get hospice care , as long as the hospice medical director or other hospice doctor re-certifies that youre terminally ill . Most hospice patients get hospice care in the comfort of their home and with their families . Depending on your condition , you may get hospice care in a Medicare-approved hospice facility , hospital , nursing home , or other long-term care facility . Coverage would include `` room and board '' in this instance .
Yes ! Depending on your condition , you may get hospice care in a Medicare-approved hospice facility , hospital , nursing home , or other long-term care facility . The hospice benefit with Medicare allows you and your family to stay together in the comfort of your home unless you need care in an inpatient facility . If the hospice team determines that you need inpatient care , the hospice team will make the arrangements for your stay . Hospice care is intended for people with 6 months or less to live if the disease runs its normal course . You can get hospice care for two 90-day benefit periods , followed by an unlimited number of 60-day benefit periods . A benefit period starts the day you begin to get hospice care and it ends when your 90-day or 60-day period ends . You have the right to change providers only once during each benefit period At the start of each period , the hospice medical director or other hospice doctor must re-certify that youre terminally ill , so you can continue to get hospice care . If you live longer than 6 months , you can still get hospice care , as long as the hospice medical director or other hospice doctor re-certifies that you 're terminally ill . You can read more details about Hospice Care & Medicare on my blog at WEBSITELINK
Medicare does cover hospice care for terminally ill patients . Care must be given by a doctor , nurse or skilled attendant . Once you are in hospice , Medicare will not cover any treatment intended to cure your illness . This includes prescription drugs for your illness . Medicare will not cover room and board in a hospital or nursing home if you are under hospice care .
Medicare Part A is , in short , your hospital insurance . It covers inpatient hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hopsice care , and home health services . Please note , there are limitations to what Medicare pays and for how long it will pay for given services . If you want to have adequate coverage for long-term care types of services -LRB- e.g. nursing home care , hospice care , and home services -RRB- , you will want to supplement your Medicare coverage with a separate long-term care policy . Medicare Part B is , in short , your physician insurance . This part of Medicare covers things like doctor visits , lab tests , surgeries , ambulance services , durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- , and other outpatient services . Medicare Part A & Part B are commonly referred to as Original Medicare and only covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of expenses . While 20 % does n't seem like it 's going to have a high dollar figure , the bill can add up quite fast . The idea of a Medigap plan is to create a predictable expense structure . If you do n't have a Medigap plan and visited the hospital/had a surgery/etc . , you 'll end up with a massive medical bill real quick . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance.It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For most individuals , Medicare Part A will be premium-free . This happens if you 're turning 65 and you 've hit your 40 credits -LRB- earned through working life/paying FICA taxes -RRB- . If you do n't hit this , the premium will be up to $ 426 per month . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A under other means -LRB- e.g. you 're under 65 and receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months or you have end-stage renal disease -RRB- . Medicare Part A , in short , is your hospital insurance - Part B is your physician insurance . Part A provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . You 're generally responsible for about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred during these visits - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % .
Medicare Part A , in short , is your hospital insurance - Part B is your physician insurance . Part A provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Part B covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . You 're generally responsible for a deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 for Part A and $ 147 for Part B -RRB- and about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred during these visits - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes , Hospice Care is covered by Medicare . Medicare will pay for the services of a Hospice agency to mange the care of the loved one in need . Depending on the agency , services can vary . Usually the care is provided in the home , but it can be offered if the person is on Medicaid and in a Nursing Home . With Hospice , no life saving measures will be taken , the patient is kept comfortable and pain is managed .
Medicare Part A , in short , is your hospital insurance - Part B is your physician insurance . Part A provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . You 're generally responsible for about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred during these visits - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . In general , Part A is going to cover : 1 -RRB- Hospital care 2 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care 3 -RRB- Hospice care 4 -RRB- Home health services 5 -RRB- Nursing home care Please note , nursing home care and skilled nursing care benefits are generally limited and certain conditions need to be met to provide coverage . If you want to have protection in the event you need long-term care , then you should secure a long-term care insurance policy -LRB- especially while you 're healthy so you can medically qualify for the coverage - it is not guaranteed issue -RRB- . You can visit the Medicare.gov website for specific information regarding exact coverage figures or send me a private message if you have any questions .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Medicare Part A covers an inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility -LRB- rehab -RRB- , hospice and some health care . Medicare pays all cost for the first 20 days in a skilled nursing facility and for days 21-100 there is a co-pay of $ 157.50 per day . Medicare will only let you stay in a skilled nursing facility for up to 100 days . Medicare does not cover long term care . Under Part A , Medicare has a deductible of $ 1,260 for an inpatient hospital stay .
To qualify for Medicare hospice , the person must have Medicare Part A , be diagnosed as terminally ill by a Medicare qualified physician and by the hospice medical director -LRB- terminally ill is described as having less than 6 months anticipated to live -RRB- , sign a form choosing hospice over other Medicare services , and receive care from a Medicare approved hospice program . The hospice benefit includes two 90-day hospice benefit periods followed by an unlimited number of 60-day benefit periods . If the patient decides to get treatment to cure his/her illness , hospice care is not covered . However , hospice does provide treatment for pain and symptom relief .
Medicare pays the hospice provider for your hospice care . Theres nodeductible . Youll pay : No more than $ 5 for each prescription drug and other similarproducts for pain relief and symptom control .5 % of the Medicare-approved amount for inpatient respitecare.For example , if Medicare pays $ 100 per day for inpatient respitecare , youll pay $ 5 per day . The amount you pay for respite carecan change each year . You can get Medicare hospice benefits when you meet all of theseconditions : You 're eligible for Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- . Your doctor and the hospice medical director certify thatyou 're terminally ill and have 6 months or less to live if yourillness runs its normal course.You sign a statement choosing hospice care instead of otherMedicare-covered benefits to treat your terminal illness . -LRB- Medicare will still pay for covered benefits for any healthproblems that are n't related to your terminal illness . -RRB- You get care from a Medicare-approved hospice program .
Medicare covers the same basic health care in Massachusetts as in the rest of the country . Part A covers hospitalization , home health , hospice , and some nursing home care . Part B covers outpatient care , medical equipment , some therapy , some prescription drugs , and misc other services and items . Medicare Part D covers prescription drugs . Medicare supplement plans cover some of what Medicare Part A and B does not .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Here is how senior coverage stacks up : Part A - covers hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care -LRB- as long as custodial care is n't the only care you need -RRB- , hospice , and health care services . Part B - covers Physician care . It covers services like lab tests , surgeries , doctor visits and supplies like wheelchairs and walkers that are considered medically necessary to treat a disease or condition . Once you have Part A and Part B , you can purchase a Medicare Supplement Plan such as Plan F , also known as Medigap . Plan F covers costs known as Medicare Part B excess charges . With Medicare Supplement Plan F you get the most complete coverage available . Because the plan covers costs in excess of Medicare-approved amounts , you may have no out-of-pocket costs for hospital and doctor 's office care with this plan . There is a Plan F `` high deductible '' option that can save you money on the monthly premiums , but the `` high deductible '' comes with a deductible of $ 2140 for 2014 before the plan pays anything . As always , it is best to find an independent insurance broker that works with seniors to help navigate the choices .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Why Contribute To A Retirement Plan ?
Contributing to a retirement plan is basically paying yourself first . Contribution to a qualified retirement plan is paying your self first and giving yourself a tax deduction and some plans have employer matched contributions . Paying yourself today will determine how you live tomorrow .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- Plan EmployerInformation - What is a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan ? Its a great benefit to both your employees and you!A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-deferred plan that can be set up forany public school , university , college or non-profit 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organization . Generally , any employee may participate as away to invest for retirement . A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan benefits more than just your employeesIt benefits your organization . Help reward and retain loyal employees while attractingnew , well-qualified ones . Maintain a positive work environment and enhance yourreputation as a progressive , caring organization , with littlecost to you . It benefits you in your goal to prepare for yourown retirement . You will have a high-quality plan to build a supplementaryretirement income while saving on taxes today . You have the ability to choose from a wide variety ofinvestment options to fit your goals . How does a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan work ? Contributions - You and your employees can contribute money on a pre-taxbasis . This means you can afford to contribute more than ifyou put money aside after taxes were deducted . And , unlike ataxable investment , earnings on the account compound taxfree until the money is withdrawn . Then both contributionsand earnings will be treated as taxable income . A pre-taxcontribution of up to $ 17,500 may be made in 2013 . Forthose 50 and older , a catch-up contribution of $ 5,500 maybe made . Additional catch-up contributions may be madeby those with at least 15 years of service with a qualifiedemployer . These limits may increase in future years.You may be able to contribute to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan as well , and double your contributions . For example , in2013 , the maximum contribution to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan is normally $ 17,500 . That can be combined with the403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan normal contribution limit of $ 17,500 for a totalof $ 35,000 invested tax deferred . Catch-up contributions canincrease this combined limit even more . Employer match You may choose to have a plan available for just youremployees to easily contribute money for their retirement.Or , you can go a step further and offer additionalcontributions where you match all or a part of employeecontributions . The plan does not require an employer match , but its a great way to encourage participation and is apowerful tool in attracting and retaining employees . If youchoose to make matching contributions , they do not counttoward the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan limits on employee contributions . Roth option - You may choose to offer a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- option . Under aRoth option , employee contributions are made on an aftertax basis . However , a distribution from a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSAaccount is completely free of federal income tax if it meetsboth of the following requirements : It is made after the end of the five year period that beginswith the year that the employee made his or her first Roth403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSA contribution to your plan . It is made after the employee reaches age 59 , becomesdisabled or dies . Access to account balances-You can select a time period for employees to become fullyvested in the employer-matching portion of the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan.Note that employee contributions are always 100 % vested.Distributions can be made only when participants severemployment , reach age 59 , become permanently disabledor experience financial hardship , or are a reservist called toactive duty for 180 days or more or for an indefinite period.The employer plan may impose additional restrictions . Unless the distributions are rolled over to an eligibleretirement plan , they will be taxed as ordinary income.Distributions before age 59 may also be subject to an IRS10 % penalty tax . Distributions attributable to employercontributions are only allowed on severance of employmentor occurrence of another event as provided by the plan .
Many retirement plans share that acronym . There are two basic types of retirement plans . The first is a defined benefit plan . A defined benefit plan computes the retirement benefit based upon a formula published in the plan . It normally takes into consideration years of service , highest income and age . If employees contribute the contribution is normally a percentage of their income . The second is a defined contribution plan . This plan normally allows the employee to contribute to their own retirement program . The employer may make an annual contribution to the plan or may match employee contributions to a certain limit . The benefit is then computed based upon the value of the fund at the time of retirement or may often be taken in a lump sum .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
A Registered Retirement Plan is a plan that as the name suggests is designed for retirement savings . The usual attributes include deductibility of contributions and tax deferred grow while in the plan . Withdrawals from the plan are usually taxable . There are different types of plans available . In Canada for example , Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are available on an individual or group basis . You can make the contributions for you own plan or to a plan for your spouse -LRB- It is an irrevocable gift -RRB- . Registered Pension Plans are also available with the employer making some or all of the contributions . In addition , the Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- does not offer tax deductibility of contributions , however the funds grow tax free and the withdrawals do not attract taxation . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Being covered by a `` retirement plan '' means that perhaps your employer had a 401k plan and you contribute to the retirment plan and the employer can `` match '' a percentage = like 3 % . There used to be alot of companies that had a `` defined benefit plan '' . Your benefit under a `` defined benefit plan '' was caluculated each year by the actuarial firm administering the plan . This type of retirement plan is rare . If you contribute to an IRA each year when you file your tax returns the tax preparer calculates how much of your contribution is allowed to deducted on your tax returns based on current tax law . Being covered by a Retirement Plan means that within the definition of the tax code you have contributed to a plan that is recognized by the IRS as a `` retirement plan .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A tax deferred Retirement Plan is a plan that allow the grow to accumulate tax free while it is inside the plan and taxed when it is withdrawn . This tax deferred growth provides a significant advantage over plans that are taxed each year . Why ? Because you get the full effect of compound interest . In Canada , a Registered Retirement Savings Plan RRSP -RRB- not only offers tax deferred growth , it also offers -LRB- subject to limits -RRB- tax deductibility of contributions . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Where the best place to save for your retirement depends on your situation . As a general rule though a plan that has tax deferral is best . That will allow you to receive the full effect of compound interest or growth . In Canada plans like Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are tax deductible and provide tax deferred growth , they are designed specifically for retirement savings . The income is taxable when it is withdrawn . If you have a plan where your employer will contribute and perhaps match your contributions . It might a Registered Pension Plan or towards your RRSP , regardless that is hard to beat . Other option is a Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- where the contributions are not deductible , but have Tax Free growth and the money is not taxed on withdrawal . There is no cookie cutter plan or product that is best . I really depends on your individual objectives . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Generally speaking , a qualified retirement plan is one legislated by the government with tax advantaged features to attract American workers to save for retirement . One example is The Employee Retirement Income Security act of 1974 -LRB- ERISA -RRB- that addresses defined benefit and defined contribution plans . And one of the most popular employer sponsored defined contribution retirement plans is a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . Plan participants can make pretax contributions that accumulate tax deferred and some employers match a portion of the employee 's contribution . Of course distributions at retirement are taxed as ordinary income and there are penalties for distributions before age 591/2 .
Which retirement plan is right for your small business depends on what you what your objectives are and the resources you are willing to commit . Retirement plans for all employees ? Key employees only ? In Canada , if you choose a group RRSP or a defined contribution pension plan , the company can determine the amount of contribution . The amount of the retirement income value or pension depends on investment growth . If you choose a defined benefit pension plan , the the company guarantees the amount of the retirement income and the amount of contribution is unknown . In that case the risk to the company increases . There are a number of solutions available depending on your objectives . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
In Canada a Registered Retirement Savings Plan , RRSP is a tax sheltered savings plan that is not taxed while funds are inside the plan only when they are withdrawn . You are permitted to deduct your contributions to an RRSP up to a yearly limit -LRB- $ 24,270 in 2014 -RRB- . You can make contributions to your own plan , your spouse 's and that of your common law partner.Your individual contribution limit is included on your Notice of income Tax Assessment including an accumulated total of unused contributions that are carried forward . You are required to start taking an income from the plan not later than December 31 in the year in which you turn 71 . The income will be taxable . Different products or vehicles or accounts are eligible to be registered including mutual funds , segregated funds -LRB- Variable annuities -RRB- , stocks and GIC 's . This is a very basic summary . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Yes , you can contribute to more than one retirement plan , but you have to be mindful of the contribution limits . If , for example , you have two jobs and each of your employers offers a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan , you must be careful not to exceed the annual contribution limits . This year -LRB- 2013 -RRB- you can contribute a maximum of $ 17,500 to your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That 's the total amount you can contribute to all plans . You can split this contribution between your plans as you see fit -LRB- Hint : take advantage of your employer 's matching contribution -RRB- , but the total amount contributed to all plans must not exceed the contribution limit .
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Is Car Insurance Quote Calculated ?
There are a lot of factors used when calculating auto insurance rates . Each company has their own formula for calculating rates . Factors they use include age , gender , location , marital status , driving record , credit rating , type and value of vehicle , residential status -LRB- owner vs renter -RRB- , and prior insurance coverage , and claims history all can factor into the rate .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
The best way to calculate how much homeowner 's insurance you need is to do an estimated replacement cost on your home . This takes about 5 minutes and it involves determining the square footage of your home along with many other calculations . A licensed broker can quickly calculate the needed information and provide a free quote for the entire policy package .
If you are seeking to estimate how much life insurance you need , many people purchase 10 times their annual salary as a life insurance face amount . Others use life insurance calculators to more accurately determine that amount . If you are trying to estimate how much your life insurance would cost , you can do that by going to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes . There you can put in different face amounts and term lengths to at least estimate the cost of term coverage , although most quote engines do now show permanent options , and the rates will depend on your health .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
Most consumers look for a `` quote '' as a price for coverage on a given amount . Some quotes can be ran for as little information as policy type , date of birth , state of residence , face amount , length of term if term life and health status . This informationcan calculate a quote which is just an estimate of premiums . The more information you provide the more accurate your price quote . Understand that underwriting has the final word in the actual premium
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
After January 1 , 2014 individual health and small group -LRB- 2 to 50 employees -RRB- healthinsurance is calculated on a community rated basis . Essentially a rate table is established for each insurance product with a corresponding rate amount for each year of age for a person enrolled . There is a rate for someone at age 25 , and slightly different rate for age 26 and so on for each year of age . For carriers applying the pure age rating approach it is a matter of telling an individual your rate at this age is `` X '' amount of dollars , for someone covering dependents it is a process of adding the rate for the subscriber , their spouse and/or dependent children -LRB- up to a maximum of 3 dependent children -RRB- for their various ages and that it the total rate for the individual plus dependents . Dependent children over age 21 are added to the cost as an adult . This is the individual insurance carriers and most small group carriers are now calculating their rates . As you might guess , for small businesses this can result in employees with the same level of enrollment coverage -LRB- e.g. - Employee Only -RRB- having different rates which is a headache from an accounting and employer contribution calculation perspective . Some small group carriers do the age calculation that I have described earlier , divide the total by the amount of enrollees in each coverage class -LRB- e.g. - Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Family -RRB- and come up with a composite rate that yields a uniform rate for each level of enrollment . How the insurance carrier has filed their products with your state insurance commission will determine which style of rates you see from different insurance carriers . However , the underlying rate methodology is the same .
Easy to find out . Many life insurance agencies have an online presence and offer instant quotes based on your age , health , coverage desired , and how long you want the coverage . The one thing you may not be able to answer right off the top of your head , though , is how much coverage to get and for how long . No worries , once again technology can help . A lot of these same websites offer a convenient calculator to help you estimate your needs . Do n't worry , you 'll find that for the average person , term life insurance is amazingly inexpensive .
A life insurance professional can provide a customized analysis using one of the conventional methods which center on a capital needs analysis . The calculations look at how much you need as a lump sum to create an income for your family . For a high level view , you can run some numbers yourself . There are a wide variety of online calculators available such as this one : WEBSITELINK Online calculators can help you visualize the need and better prepare you for a planning discussion with your agent who will help you ensure you have the right amount of life insurance .
The best life insurance isone that is sold by a stable , A-rated -LRB- A.M. Best -RRB- insurance company , and isthe lowest priced for the amount and length -LRB- term -RRB- you need Sounds complicated ? Not really . To get the best deal , visit a website that offers term life quotes . There are many out there , but I like the QualityTermLife website because it lets you compare over 100 insurers , has a needs calculator to help figure out just how much to buy , and you do n't have to give your phone or email just to see the quotes .
There are two popular and entirely different purposes to calculate present value of annuities . 1 -RRB- * Calculating retirement funding needs . Suppose you are planning to retire next month and want to purchase a fixed annuity with guaranteed interest rate of 3 % that will immediately start providing you with $ 25,000 of annual retirement income over the next 25 years . Being able to calculate present value of annuities helps you see the lump sum you will need to pay for your annuity -LRB- in this case , approx $ 435,330 -RRB- . 1 -RRB- * Calculating loan payments . Using the same example in reverse , let 's say you had a $ 435,330 mortgage at 3 % and you wanted to pay it off in 25 years . Purchasing an annuity for that amount would allow you to make payments of $ 25,000 per year for the next 25 years . * Both of these are overly simplistic examples . Talk to a licensed agent versed in annuities for specific annuity details .
Homeowners Insurance rates are based on ` RISK ' ! The risk is inclusive of the Reconstruction Value of the home , the age of the home , the geographic location of the home , the additional endorsements required by the customer and the deductible chosen . The first step is to calculate the reconstruction value , the next step is to select the requested endorsements and deductible and the third step is to qualify the home before generating the associated rate . Many carriers require the home to be within a certain distance of a fire station , fire hydrant and have protective features . Many carriers will not accept a home where certain animals known to have anaggressivetemperament reside . For a quote in AZ , CA , NV , you may obtain a quote at : WEBSITELINK For other States , you may wish to find a local agent to assist with a quote !
I love this question . I have been a Life Insurance agent for close to 30 years and I have no clue . I see commercials that say `` Only 1 $ per unit '' Or `` Only $ 1 per unit per day '' Call the 800 # and you get the `` well it depends ... '' If they do not know how is the public supposed to know ? As an agent it can mean $ 1,000 of base coverage or it can mean $ 1,000 , $ 5,000 or even $ 10,000 in child rider . The majority of Life Insurance is sold `` per $ 1,000 '' The cost per thousand is determined by many factors such as age , sex , health and type and amount of coverage . While it is easy to use a calculator to come up with a monthly quote . It takes an experienced agent to come up with a quote that truly represents what you may qualify for . Not some low ball cost per unit .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
end question
start question
annuities
When Will Annuity Rates Go Up ?
No one is a prognosticator in predicating when and if interest rates go up . But if annuity sales trends -LRB- five year guaranteed rate annuities -RRB- are any indication , then perhaps in five years or less -LRB- 2.95 % for five years . -RRB- Long term fixed interest rate annuities , currently at 3.25 % for ten years is too long if rates start moving up and your annuity has punitive surrender charges if you want to move .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
To compare life insurance rates , be sure you are comparing the same type of policy to another . E.g. Comparing 10 year term to 20 year term is not a legitimate comparison . Check to see how long the rates are guaranteed not to go up . If one 20 year policy is guaranteed not to go up in price for 20 years , it is not fair to compare it to a 20 year term policy that is guaranteed not to go up in 10 years . Do not compare a policy by the rating they give you . Compare them by price . Ratings are just words . Price is where the rubber meets the road . If you have a quote for a level premium that will not go up in price , and also quotes for graded coverage/policies that can go up in price , it is usually best to go with the level premium that will not go up in price , even if it is higher .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
The reason annuity rates are falling as you say is simply because interest rates are at historically low rates . Fixed Annuities are tied to the interest rates , and while they do n't necessarily keep pace with the treasury and the national prime rate they do eventually come in line . Obviously since interest rates are very low currently they are bound to go up . As that happens we will see a rise in the rates annuities pay . Variable annuities are tied to the stock market or a particular index depending on the annuity . As a result they can have a much greater return than fixed annuities , however they are also at high risk when the markets take a dive .
No one is a prognosticator in predicating when and if interest rates go up . But if annuity sales trends -LRB- five year guaranteed rate annuities -RRB- are any indication , then perhaps in five years or less -LRB- 2.95 % for five years . -RRB- Long term fixed interest rate annuities , currently at 3.25 % for ten years is too long if rates start moving up and your annuity has punitive surrender charges if you want to move .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
I agree with Cathy , but also offer one other major reason rates go up . Insurers are pricing a product before they know their cost . It something like building a spec house for sale at $ 300,000 with out knowing that the purchaser is going to require all hard wood floors , a finished basement and a three car garage . Had you known you would have priced your product at $ 400,000 . This is some of the dilemma of insurers . Thy can look at historical outcomes and yet may not see a trend developing before it happens . The reason most auto insurance is sold in Six month terms in the US , is that it often takes a minimum of one year for the carrier to realize rate level on all customers in a certain state and rate filing . Let me give an example : If company A sees it needs rate increase on its TX auto insurance business and puts that rate into effect after state approval on July 1,2014 it will take a full six months to raise the rate level to the new level for the last customer whose policy incepts on 12/31/2014 . Then it takes the company another 6 months to earn the premium for each of those customers . It has to set aside some money in case you decide to move your business , as well as keep reserves for accidents that have occurred or are known to be likely to occur in the future.So in a full year at 7/1/2015 the company has realized the effects of its rate filing in the state . If it now needs more funds , it will take the same 12 months to fully earn that premium . So in effect you can see that the process of getting an adequate rate for an insurers losses and expected losses is at least a year on six month polices and double that to two years to achieve the rate level on annual policies . That said , recognize that your rates can go up annually in a 12 month policy because of a company 's filings and go up as much as every six months for an insurer who uses 6 moth policies.So , all that said , you do n't control the pricing that is an aggregate need of the insurer but you can better protect yourself by buying a 12 month policy . Lock in a rate level . If you do not change the exposure -LRB- new car or new operators and such -RRB- , you will have locked in rate for one whole year . So my advice is to seek out an insurer that writes annual policies if available .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
The reason that life insurance premiums go up with age is because mortality rates go up the longer someone lives . When someone buys a 10 year term life insurance policy at age 20 , the rates will not be much higher than at age 30 , because the death rate for 30-40 year old persons does not vary much . However , the rates for a 10 year term policy will be much higher for a 60 year old person than a 50 year old person , because mortality rates go up a lot between ages 60-70 , especially for men .
When shopping for Medicare Supplement do not just go by rates . Many agents will tell you that all plans are the same and the only difference is rates , and that is true . However , I have seen many companies go in to an area with rates that are low , only to raise the rates by 30 % or more the following year . Unless you like changing plans every year and you know your health will always be good , this is not necessarily the best way to go . Look for a company that is competitive , but that has a good history of rate increases , generally less than 10 % . Every agent is getting solicited by companies wanting them to sell their now lowest rate plan . Find a good local agent who has been around for a while . I personally like the AARP Med Sup . It is competitive and has an excellent rate history . It also uses community rating versus attained age rating . With attained age , which most companies use , you pay a low rate at first but every year you can count on a rate increase just because you got older , in addition to the rate increase the company has . With community rating , the rates are equaled over the ages so that you pay a little more at 65 for example but when you are 85 your rates will be lower than if you went with an attained age company . Also look for an agent that also does Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug plans . He will be able to help you decide which would be to your best advantage .
The rate of return of annuities really depends on what type of annuity you are talking about . Fixed Annuities have a set base rate similar to a CD , they pay a guaranteed rates of interest . If you are looking for a fixed annuity make sure you shop around some companies like Fidelity & Guaranty Life and Guaranty Income Life are raising their base rates . When you are looking at Index Annuities the insurance company gives you a guaranteed minimum interest rate and also a crediting strategy like the S&P 500 or something like that . Think of it this way there are two buckets of money , the first has your money with the guaranteed interest rate , the second has your money linked to the crediting strategy of the market . If the market goes up they will credit that bucket with interest -LRB- every company has different participation rates and caps -RRB- . If the market is down then that bucket will earn no interest . When ever you want to start drawing an income , the insurance company will see which bucket has the most money and that bucket will be used for income . If you work with a good broker , they have software that will show you what your investment will look like with all of the companies . Please let me know if I can help in any way .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Pregnancy Affect Life Insurance Rates ?
Pregnancy can affect life insurance rates due to the applicant 's weight or if there are some complications such as gestational diabetes . If in the third trimester or if there are serious complications , the policy will usually be postponed until after the baby is born . Not all companies will issue a policy during pregnancy , but aside from those things , pregnancy does not affect rates with some companies .
Pregnancy can affect life insurance rates due to the applicant 's weight or if there are some complications such as gestational diabetes . If in the third trimester or if there are serious complications , the policy will usually be postponed until after the baby is born . Not all companies will issue a policy during pregnancy , but aside from those things , pregnancy does not affect rates with some companies .
Does Pregnancy affect life insurance ? Yes and no . If you are in the first two tirmesters , with a normal pregnancy going so far , no real underwriting problems . If you are in your third trimester , most carriers will hold the application till the baby is born . If you are experiencing any complications of pregnancy , you may be rated down or declined until after childbirth .
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
If you are in the third trimester of pregnancy , most medically underwritten carriers will ask you to postpone applying for life insurance until after the birth of your baby . Some No Exam policies will accept an application into the third trimester as long as weight and other guidelines are met . In the first two trimesters of pregnancy , it varies between carriers , but you should be able to find a company that will cover you with little affect on your premium .
It really depends on the type of short term disability plan that you have . Most I have seen will not cover a normal pregnancy but will a complicated pregnancy . Some disability insurance will not cover any type of pregnancy without a medical diagnosis of a complication caused by the pregnancy other than the pregnancy itself . If you can locate your policy , read the exclusions and limitations page to find out what it specifically covers in regards to pregnancy .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
Short Term Disability Insurance covers time taken off for a normal pregnancy and childbirth . No Disability Insurance would cover taking off the entire pregnancy for a normal pregnancy . Long Term Disability Insurance is the type of DI that covers long term absence due to complications of pregnancy and childbirth .
Of course you can . Just do n't look to the disability policy to help finance time off work or issues from the pregnancy . Insurance companies have this nasty little `` pre-existing conditions '' clause with disability insurance . A disability policy will help with other problems down the road but wo n't help with the pregnancy . However , the pregnancy itself does not stop your ability to purchase a disability policy .
Every insurance carrier will ask medical questions when completing an application.Some carriers will decline applications for pregnant women.Many willnot ask any pregnancy related questions , so you may be able to purchase a policy while pregnant in many cases . Every policy will exclude coverage for any preexisting medical condition . That exclusion may last 6 to 12 months . That means your existing pregnancy will not be covered , but accidents and illnesses unrelated to your pregnancy may be covered . Policies covering normal childbirth are difficult to find . They are only offered through employers . If you have the opportunity to buy a policy it may be your only chance to get covered for future pregnancies .
Up until the third trimester , you should have no problem getting life insurance while pregnant , as long as you fit the weight guidelines and have no serious complications . If you have manageable health conditions associated with your pregnancy , such as controlled gestational diabetes , you can still get Preferred rates with some companies . I just had a policy approved today at the best rate class for someone who applied in her second term of pregnancy for a medically underwritten policy . Some companies restrict applying in the third trimester , but there are nonmed policies that you can get at any stage of pregnancy .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
Normally , pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition and not covered by a disability insurance policy . It is up to the company whether they would postpone taking the application or exclude that pregnancy from coverage . Once the baby is born , you can apply for disability insurance prior to becoming pregnant again , to obtain coverage for that pregnancy .
Unfortunately , it is not possible to purchase disability insurance that will cover your pregnancy , after you are pregnant , in Rhode Island or other states . The pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition . If you are buying the disability insurance with the idea of excluding pregnancy related extended absences , it may be possible that some disability policies would cover you with an exclusion .
I have never seen any exclusion for pregnancy . Most people on Medicare are beyond child bearing years . If a person who is younger and receiving Medicare because of disability gets pregnant the pregnancy would most likely be covered the same as any illness . Under the new PPACA law pregnancy is required to be covered for all female applicants of health insurance .
Can I get disability insurance when pregnant ? Well possibly , but you wo n't like that they would exclude covering time off for the pregnancy as it is a pre-existing condition . Depending on your health at the time , and where you are at in the pregnancy , you could be covered , but not for the pregnancy .
You can purchase a short term disability policy while pregnant . Many carriers will not ask pregnancy related questions on the application , although some do . The policy may cover any accidents or illnesses not caused by a preexisting condition after one year . Future pregnancies will be covered , however no policy will cover your current pregnancy .
If your question is what affects the stability of life insurance rates , the answer is , not very much . Life insurance rates are based on multiple millions of lives and death rates are predictable . A dramatic change in the financial markets could affect life insurance rates if the companies can not earn the necessary returns to maintain their promises . A dramatic epidemic could affect rates . Recently rates were affected by regulation . These changes are generally small .
My experience has been that it is possible to get life insurance during the first trimester , but that insurance agencies are reluctant to take an application for a woman in her second and third trimesters of pregnancy , in case of complications . But I am sure there are some companies that will cover women who are up to 6 months pregnant with a medically underwritten policy , especially if they have had previous event free pregnancies and have no pre-existing conditions . For those who are in the third trimester of pregnancy , there are No Exam policies you can get .
It 's going to depend on what trimester of pregnancy the person is in . Usually the first two trimesters it is not a problem as long as there is a good record of prenatal care and things are considered to be a `` normal '' pregnancy . The third trimester can be a bit dicey as the closer the potential insured gets to delivery , the more a insurance carrier will want to wait . Your chances are pretty good if you are maintaing good health during the pregnancy and under a doctor 's care . Expect underwriting to go a bit longer than usual as doctor 's records will be asked for . Just do n't put it off till the third trimester if it is something you need to do .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Are Life Insurance Quotes ?
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In the best of all situations , life insurance quotes are a comparison of many , if not all companies at a particular health rating , amount and length of term . The problem for the consumer in this situation is that the human factor is missing . Does one carrier have different underwriting , can the broker make a case for a better health rating ? Quotes in life insurance are only estimates because the carrier itself is the only entity that can make an offer . Find a good independent agent and let them be your advocate .
Life insurance quotes are the rates that you are expected to pay based on your age , gender , tobacco status , and health details . Life insurance rates are the price you actually pay . If you are looking at simplified or guaranteed issue policies where there is just one set of rates , then your quote will be what you pay -LRB- if approved for the policy -RRB- . If you are looking at a policy that requires an exam , or that offers more than one set of rates , then the quote may not be what you actually pay . A good agent will go over your health details and do their best to match you with a policy that has the best price for your unique profile . The more you share and the more experienced your agent , the more likely that the rate you pay will match your quote . But you never know for sure until your policy is approved .
That is a great question ! A life insurance quote is like the estimate that you would get before having repairs done on your home or on your car . The estimate gives you an idea of what the expected cost of the repairs will be , and the insurance quote does the same thing . It is the expected cost of your insurance . Both estimates can be on the mark , or different depending upon what the company finds when they start looking closely at the work . In the case of life insurance , that would be your medical history , the underwriting decisions , and the prescription history that you have . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
In simple terms , a life insurance quote is a proposal from a life insurance carrier to a prospective customer . The initial quote is generally based off of basic information about the person such as their age , sex , height & weight , tobacco use status and the amount of life insurance coverage they are seeking . For any meaningful level of life insurance the consumer should be aware that a proposal is only a proposal and not a firm offer of coverage . A life insurance quote is generally a contingent offer based upon best case assumptions . A life insurance application form will have to be completed in which the person applying for life insurance will have to answer medical questions and some lifestyle questions -LRB- do you skydive , etc. -RRB- . It is also likely that the applicant will have to take at least a basic medical exam where blood and urine samples will be taken . For high amounts of life insurance coverage a much more extensive physical exam may have to be taken before the applicant will be approved for coverage .
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
There are several ways to obtain a quote for homeowners insurance . You may certainly fill out a quote form online ; almost every big name carrier has one on their website/app . The problem with doing a quote yourself is that you are not a licensed insurance agent , you likely do not know what limits you should have . Most online quotes also do not run your credit or loss history , which may have big impacts on your premium . What is the best way to get an accurate quote ? Contact a licensed independent insurance agent and give them your information . Ask questions ! Tell them your story ! Tell them what kinds of things you own ! If you want your assets properly covered more information is better . Most agencies have a form on their website/app a prospect may complete . Otherwise email or call asking for a quote .
California life insurance quotes can be found online through life insurance websites that have a quote engine that you can use -LRB- most do -RRB- . If you want to compare multiple companies at the same time , I would recommend using the quote engine from a life insurance broker website -LRB- brokers are insurance agents who can quote and sell products from multiple companies -RRB- . The quote engines will typically request a few pieces of data such as your name , date of birth , height/weight profile , any prescriptions you take or medical conditions you 're being treated for , the state you live in , and the amount and length of coverage to quote . Once you hit submit , an instant quote will be generated for you to review and an agent will likely follow-up with you shortly . Please note , an instant quote is , in short , just a rough estimate . The risk classification you qualify for is the MOST important factor in creating a quote because it 's what determines the premiums for the desired coverage -LRB- e.g. being approved for a standard risk class vs. a preferred plus risk class will result in very different numbers -RRB- . If you are being treated for any medical conditions or take a number of prescriptions , you will get a much more accurate response by consulting with an insurance broker.who can shop the case for you . Buying life insurance can be a very strenuous and time consuming task when you try to do it on your own . We do not charge any fees for our services , so you can only help yourself by talking with a broker . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can easily compare term life insurance quotes by going to a website that shows you quotes from multiple companies . If you pick a website with `` instant '' quotes , the quotes will come up comparing quotes from different companies , and you can then change variables to compare quotes on different policies within that company . Once you see a policy you are interested in , be sure to talk to someone at that agency , or communicate by email , so that you can be sure you qualify for that particular rate . No quote engine can cover every question , and you may find that there is an even lower price out there for you , or a policy that works better for your needs . But comparing quotes online is a good place to start .
Health insurance for small businesses works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you will need to consult with an experienced health insurance broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help -LRB- we can help you get your company 's group health insurance set up -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Health insurance for small businesses is known as group health insurance and it works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . So , in short , there 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , I recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
There are many contributors to this website that offer free life insurance quotes on our own business websites . Some , like ours , will even give quotes for certain health conditions . Keep in mind that accurate quotes are dependent on variables that can not possibly covered with an online quote engine , unless that quote engine is for a specific simplified issue -LRB- no exam -RRB- product . Quotes can be firmed up by additional questions asked over the phone or by email . To get the lowest priced quotes for your unique profile , contact an agency that is reputable and knows how to match you up with the companies best suited to your health , age , build and tobacco status .
To see what life insurance costs for a 40 year old male or female , with different builds and health conditions , you should talk to an insurance professional who asks questions so he/she can quote you correctly . To get a general idea of what different face amount and policy terms would cost for a 40 year old , you can use a free , instant quote engine provided on some life insurance websites . However , that quote could be way off base when risk factors and health conditions are involved . It is always best to talk to someone in addition to getting your quote online .
You should buy term life insurance from an independent agent because they can review options from multiple companies . Captive agents generally only offer you their company first before looking at other options . Some people prefer to buy online so they `` do n't have to be bothered '' with the process of buying insurance . However , this can often result in you not getting the best product for your needs because you do n't know what risk class you would qualify for from each company . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines and not every company is going to offer you the same risk class - e.g. company A could offer preferred and company B could offer standard . Online instant quotes only provide numbers based off of given criteria and there 's no guarantee you would qualify for it - in short , they are just rough estimates . You need to understand what risk class you would most likely qualify for from each company before applying - simply put , not everyone gets the preferred plus rates -LRB- which is what many people will quote themselves when running instant online quotes -RRB- . Also , applying to multiple companies at the same time can often work against you . Independent agents can help you through every step of the process in great detail and provide you with much more accurate quotes than what you may be looking at on your own . If I can help you out with your life insurance needs or if you have any other questions , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
To find the price of AFLAC Life Insurance , contact an American Family Life Insurance agent . The price will depend on your age , sex , health factors , amount of life insurance you are looking for , and type of policy you desire . If you want to compare the AFLAC quote with other life insurance quotes on the internet , you can visit a site with a free life insurance quote engine and input your information . Be sure to compare prices for the same product when making your decision . E.g. Do n't compare a 10 year Term quote with a 20 year Term quote ; make sure both are the same number of years and are both guaranteed not to go up in price for the same number of years .
To compare life insurance quotes in Mississippi , you can go to a website that offers life insurance in Mississippi , put in your date of birth , gender , height , weight , whether you use tobacco , and basic health conditions . If the quoter does not have those fields , the quote will be a general quote , which is not at all accurate . But it can show you what that best rates run in MS. You can also call or email an online agency that offers life insurance in Mississippi to obtain your quote . They will run through the health questions with you and help you compare quotes from multiple companies . Looking at the leaderboard , some of us have online agencies , so that is a place to start . Or you can use a search engine to find one .
Different websites have different ways of giving quotes online . With ours , you can put in your information and get quotes instantly , then change the variables to get different types of quotes . We also give average quotes for some health conditions . With others , you put in your information , then someone calls you with the actual quote . Either way , it is a good idea to talk to an agent to give the extra health details , help you decide the amount , and finalize your best , most accurate quote .
I would suggest looking at an instant term life insurance site in a couple of ways . Some local agents may provide an instant quote on their website . You can search for `` life insurance quotes '' and see which are offering quotes . Some sites may say quotes but they are a contact form . Some sites are actual quotes and show up immediately . You can call the agent at your convenience if you have questions . Some agent site allow you put in your application right away and get the process started . Another option is Term4Sale.com . It has a online quote then it will show your 3 agents . Look for one with a local phone number and give them a call . If you have a long term health issue , you are better served calling an agent that is independent with multiple carriers and find the best fit for you .
the most efficient way to get a lower auto insurance quote is to get quotes from several independent auto insurance agents . that way , you 're only contacting a handful of agents but can get quotes from dozens of companies . word of caution : if you 're getting a quote online , make sure the websites you get quotes from have a name , address and phone number listed . If not , you 're quoting with a lead generation site . lead generation sites do not sell insurance . they simply sell your information to insurance agents . you may find the lowest rate this way , but your phone will blow in the process . any legitimate agent will have their info listed on the website .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Does Life Insurance End ?
Term Life Insurance ends when you quit paying on it . If you forget a payment , if your address or bank account changes and premiums go unpaid , or if you purposefully stop paying on a Term policy , the insurance company will give you one month to make that payment up . After the one month grace period is over , you must prove your health qiualifies to have the policy reinstated . If the level part of a Term policy is over -LRB- e.g. you are entering year 11 of a 10 year Term policy -RRB- , the policy will either automatically renew at an extremely high price , or the company will send you a letter telling you the new higher price and you must choose if you want it to renew at that price . From then on , the premium can go up annually . Most people do quit paying their Term Life Insurance and let it end at that point . Whole or Universal Life can be `` paid up '' for life , in which case all the premiums have been made and the policy will not end -LRB- as long as it was properly set up , there are no unpaid loans , etc -RRB- . Otherwise , permanent insurance will end when the payer quits paying premiums and there is not enough cash value to pay them . `
Term Life means life insurance that will end after a certain term , or number of years . E.g. 20 year Term will end after 20 years . It is assumed that the price will stay the same for the entire term , but not every policy 's price is guaranteed to stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for the entire term . So look at that feature when you pick out your Term policy . Also , Term life does not usually just end when the term ends ; it usually jumps way up in price and then can go up every year after that . If you need to keep the policy for a short time after the term ends , it is possible , but not economically feasible for most people to keep up for very long . When the term ends , most people buy a new policy , if they are able to qualify for one at that time .
Term Life Insurance Ends when the contract period is over . Term life Insurance ends when you havent paid your premium and the reinstatement period is over . Term life insurance ends when a death claim occurs while the policy is in force . Term life insurance ends and permanent life insurance begins when the conversion privilege is exercised on the existing term life insurance policy .
The age that Life Insurance ends is dependent on the age that the person was when they took it out , and the type of policy they took out . For Term Life Insurance , the policy ends -LRB- or goes up in price to what is usually an unaffordable cost -RRB- at the end of the term . Therefore , someone who is 55 years old and takes out a 10 year Term policy will have to find a new policy at age 65 . For Whole Life Insurance , the policy ends when death occurs or when the policy matures -LRB- typically at age 100 -RRB- . At either time , the full amount of the death benefit is paid -LRB- when the policy matures , you are actually receiving the cash value , which becomes equal to the death benefit , called `` endowment '' -RRB- . If you quit paying premiums on the policy , or borrow without paying it back , the policy could end sooner without any benefit being paid . This is true for any type of Life Insurance policy . Some Whole Life policies are paid for with a single premium ; as long as you do n't borrow from them , those will be in effect upon death or maturity without paying any more premiums , as will any policy that is `` paid up '' at a certain point . Universal Life operates much like Whole Life , except you can pick an age at which your guaranteed coverage will end .
Term life insurance may end at the end of the term , or it may go up in price at the end of the term . The end of the term is the period when the guaranteed premium ends . E.g. . If you buy a ten year term policy , the policy will end or the premium will go up at the start of year 11 . Because the premiums go up so high , most people do end their term policies when the term ends . However , if there is a provision for the premium to go up -LRB- called annually renewable -RRB- , it can go up to whatever age the policy dictates . Some are annually renewable as high as age 90 . Another option offered for many term policies is to convert the policy to permanent insurance . This must be done before the term ends . Again , the price per thousand dollars of coverage is much higher for the new policy than it was for the term policy . However , it is a good option if you can not qualify for new insurance , and you may be able to take a smaller face amount to keep the premium affordable .
Term life insurance is life insurance that covers you for a `` term '' , or temporary period of time . The most common terms are 10 , 15 , 20 , or 30 years . The premium will usually stay the same during the term , then jump up to a very high price at the end of the term . After that , it will continue to go up every year . Some policies simply end when the term ends . Term policies have no cash value . You will not receive any money back -LRB- unless you took ROP term , in which case it would return the premiums you paid in , at the end of the term -RRB- . People buy Term insurance for it 's relatively low price . If you can afford to pay the premiums for Whole Life or Universal Life , you might end up paying less overall , because your premiums can end at some point but your policy can stay in effect . With Term , when you quit paying premiums , your coverage ends . If you have a temporary need , Term can be a great choice .
That is a great question ! There are two basic types of life insurance , one that ends , and one that does n't . The one that ends is called `` term '' insurance . This type of policy is advertised often on TV and in mail by large Senior Citizen friendly companies , and unless you realize that it ends when you turn 80 , can be in for a big , unpleasant surprise . The term policy as a clearly stated end date , has no value if it does n't pay out , and becomes very expensive very quickly if renewed . `` Whole life '' insurance is exactly that - insurance for your whole life . It is more expensive than term life , because as long as you make your payments , it 's going to pay out -LRB- most term policies never do , that 's why they are so cheap -RRB- . If you would like to discuss which one might be best for you , contact me , and I 'll make time for you . Thanks for asking !
All policies end when death occurs . If the policy is in force at the time of death , the policy will pay the face amount at that time . When you purchase Term Life Insurance , you decide at that time when you want your coverage to end . It corresponds with the number of years in your Term policy . As a rule , the older you are when the policy ends , the higher the premium will be . But you also have to consider that , if you want to purchase a new policy after this one ends , the price on the new policy will be much higher , or you may not be able to qualify for the amount of coverage that you want at that time . So locking in the premium for a long period of time while you are healthy is a good idea , if you need the coverage for a long period of time . Permanent life insurance ends when the policy matures , at which time you can take the face amount in cash . But most people choose to keep the policy in effect beyond that , until death .
When term life insurance ends , the premium rises drastically or the policy simply ends . When the premium rises at the end of the term , it is no longer locked in and can raise annually . Rather than wait for the term to end and the premium to jump up , you might want to look into converting your policy to permanent life insurance . Whether you convert your policy to permanent before the term ends , or pay the new annually renewable premium at the end of the term , your premium will be substantially higher . But by converting you can lock in your premium for a longer period of time .
That is a great question ! Unlike a whole life policy , which ends when you do , term policies almost always end before you do . It 's why they are so cheaply offered , statistically , the companies rarely have to pay out , compared to whole life policies . So when they do end , you have really only three choices : walk away as if there never was a policy , -LRB- since there is nothing contractually obligating either of you anymore , in the typical policy case -RRB- , hope that the policy has a conversion clause -LRB- one that allows your paid premiums to be converted to a paid up whole life policy with a greatly reduced face value -RRB- , or you renew the policy . If you choose the latter , be prepared for the policy to renew in one year terms , and for the price to go up exponentially each time . They get very expensive very quickly . This can be a real problem if it happens when age or health issues prevent you from finding another company that will write you . This is often the case with the term policies that companies like AARP and AAA offer , policies that end when you turn 80 . With life expectancy now averaging years longer than 80 , and the increasing costs as you age , more and more Elder citizens find themselves out a lot of money , and with no protection . Please be careful when you are looking at these kinds of policies , okay ? Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! There are a couple of reasons why a whole life policy makes sense . One would be if it is purchased for a young child . The price is locked in at that low rate for their entire life , and many companies will offer the opportunity to increase that coverage without any questions . The second is that the policy does n't end , so there is no way that you can outlive it . Many senior citizens purchase the policy advertised on TV by the large senior citizen advocate company , only to find that it ends when they turn 80 . Given that the average life expectancy is 84 for women and 82 for men , for many that is a terrible surprise to find that the policy ends , and that getting another one is too expensive , or not available due to their health issues . The third is that no matter how badly your health declines , you have insurance that ca n't drop you , or raise your rates . When your term policy ends , and youwant to get another one , your age and health issues are re-evaluated when determining eligibility and price . Please feel free to contact me if you would like to discuss this further . Thanks for asking !
Term life insurance is life insurance that will end after a certain length of time . Some Term Life Insurance policies will automatically renew at the end of the term at a much higher price than before , and can then go up in price every year . With other Term policies , you must elect to pay the new , higher premium when the level period ends . Either way , the time of level premium ends at the end of the term .
It is going to depend on the type of policy purchased . For term insurance there is a stated policy end . Usually with newer term policies the end is age 90 or 95 . With older policies as young as 70 could be the end . AARP 's term life ends at age 80 for example . With universal life policies have age limits of up to age 121 in some cases . There are some Guaranteed Universal LIfe policies that offer lifetime coverage . These are fairly new policies , that just require a set premium be paid for the life of the policy . Whole life depending on the age of the policy will `` endow '' at age 100 or later . At that point the cash value will be greater than the death benefit and the insured gets the cash values . The big thing to remember is that policy end dates are always changing when new insurance plans are created . The big thing is check your policy . An end date will be stated in the body of the policy . This is a multiple answer question , you have to look .
Term Life Insurance does not have the option to become paid up , like permanent life insurance does . If you pay your policy each monththrough to the end of the term , the policy simply ends or takes on a higher cost . There is nothing to cash in . Also , you do not have the option to pay term at an increased cost for a shorter time period , like you do with permanent insurance . If you quit paying on it at any time , the policy ends .
Yes , term life has an endpoint . The thing to be aware of is when . Many of the older policies written have much earlier term end dates than the newer plans . It is not uncommon to find 70 or 75 as an end date on older term policies . Newer policies may carry a 90 to 95 end date . Although some new plans only run the length of the level term period . Very important to open your policy and take a few minutes to read what it does do , or when selecting a new plan , ask the agent .
Term life insurance will usually provide coverage as long as premiums are being paid . Most Term policies are annually renewable after the years of the term end . The prices are very high , but if you choose to pay them , you will still have coverage . If your policy does not offer that provision , your policy will end when the years of the term have passed . E.g. . If you took out a 20 year Term policy , it will end when the 20 years have passed . Again . you must have paid premiums the entire time for the policy to stay in effect .
Term insurance will expire at some point in time as term policies are closed contracts which have a beginning and an end . With newer term policies the end comes between the ages of 90 to 95 . Many of the older term policies written end between the ages of 70 and 80 . If you have an older term policy , check to see when the policy ends and if there is a conversion option if you need coverage longer than you previously thought you would . As Jerry mentioned most term policies written currently have level premium periods of 5-30 years , but still have a life after in most cases . The cost after the level period expires will be much higher and increase every year after until the policy ends .
Yes . All life insurance will end upon your death if the policy is still in force when you die . Some life insurance is not really designed to last until you die . Term life insurance is always intended to be temporary insurance and only last 20 years or 30 years or for whatever term you buy it for . It actually does n't end because you COULD renew it but no one ever does because the policy premium would be very very expensive . It 's usually cheaper to either start over with a new policy or walk away from it .
Term life insurance ends when you quit paying it . Most term life insurance is guaranteed to stay level for X number of years , and then the premium jumps very high and keeps going up every year . Most people quit paying it before having to pay these high premiums . When Term life insurance ends , it does not have any cash value and would no longer pay the death benefit if the insured person died .
When you purchase Term Life Insurance , you select a period of time , or `` term '' , during which your premiums will remain the same , or `` level '' . Most people choose term periods of 10 , 15 , 20 , or 30 years . If the policy is guaranteed level , there is no chance that your premiums will go up , or your face amount will do down , during this period of time . When that term ends , your policy may simply end , or most likely , the premiums will jump way up . That is because the guaranteed level term has ended . From then on , the premiums can go up each year until you hit a certain age , usually 80-90 . At that time , the policy officially expires . But because the premiums go so high after the level term period ends , most people drop their term policies long before it officially expires .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Variable Term Life Insurance ?
Variable term life insurance ? Never heard of that ! You may be thinking of a variable ` premium ' or `` flexible premium '' life insurance . . ? As Peggy mentioned above , variable products have cash value and term policies do not . The `` variable '' component in those products is the amount of interest earned , because they are tied to investments in the stock market . A flexible premium life insurance would be a Universal Life policy , which is actually similar to a term policy where the cost of insurance goes up and once that exceeds what is being paid in premiums the sach value is consumed until there is no more insurance . There is such a thing as `` indexed '' universal Life , which is tied to a stock index and therefore the interest paid into the cash value will vary depending on the performance of the index .
There is no such thing as variable term life insurance . Variable life insurance has a cash value component , which Term does not . Variable life insurance can use the stock market to grow -LRB- or lose -RRB- cash value . Since Term Life Insurance does not have a cash value , the word variable can not apply to it , at least in the traditional sense .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
There are many choices of life insurance available to you . The main stream life insurance products are term life , universal life , variable life and whole life . Each one has a specific purpose . Term life insurance is meant to coverage a specific period of time . The common terms are 1-5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . This means the rate or premium you purchase is guaranteed level for that period of time regardless of change in health , life style or occupation . Term life is commonly used for younger people starting out in life , covering a large debt , life a mortgage on a home or business debt , or covering for a young child 's education . term life insurance allows for the largest face amount for the smallest premium payments . Universal life and variable life are permanent life insurance solutions that build cash value . Typically the premiums are more expensive and the face amounts are less because part of the premium is going into a cash value fund that can be invested with numerous options . The cash value can later be used for retirement , college funds , critical or chronic illness or even to purchase a large asset like a home . The universal and variable options are typically more aggressive with the cash value funds . The last option , whole life insurance , is very similar to the previous universal life insurance options . However , the cash value funds are typically a fixed percentage of growth . Whole life as it 's name suggests is primarily meant to cover you for your entire life . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker with numerous carriers to shop the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
There is no such thing as variable term life insurance . Variable life insurance has a cash value component , which Term does not . Variable life insurance can use the stock market to grow -LRB- or lose -RRB- cash value . Since Term Life Insurance does not have a cash value , the word variable can not apply to it , at least in the traditional sense .
Variable term life insurance ? Never heard of that ! You may be thinking of a variable ` premium ' or `` flexible premium '' life insurance . . ? As Peggy mentioned above , variable products have cash value and term policies do not . The `` variable '' component in those products is the amount of interest earned , because they are tied to investments in the stock market . A flexible premium life insurance would be a Universal Life policy , which is actually similar to a term policy where the cost of insurance goes up and once that exceeds what is being paid in premiums the sach value is consumed until there is no more insurance . There is such a thing as `` indexed '' universal Life , which is tied to a stock index and therefore the interest paid into the cash value will vary depending on the performance of the index .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
Universal Variable Life Insurance -LRB- or VUL - Variable Universal Life insurance -RRB- is a form of life insurance that has a death benefit and investment component . Agents who sell Variable Universal Life must have a securities license in addition to a life insurance license . The variable part of the title refers to the investment aspect ; the universal part of the title refers to the insurance aspect of this product .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals .
Met life variable is directly related on how well the Dow Jones Does . If the Dow Jones has a bad year meaning it goes down in value in the full year , than most likely your variable will too . The variable will swing up or down just like the stock market . If you anticipate a bad year in the Dow Jones then your variable will to in most cases depending on what its invested in .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
Products , in and of themselves , dont present a good value or a bad value . Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is It Against The Law To Not Have Health Insurance ?
No . You can continue to not have health insurance , however , if you elect this option , you will have to pay a penalty -LRB- a `` shared responsibility payment '' is how they titled it I believe -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid paying the penalty , you would need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! With the over fifty attempted repeal tries , and the very public stances against it that the Republican party has , you are certainly right to wonder . But for all of the bluster and rhetoric , here 's what the reality is - the American public does like the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , as the uninsured rate is the lowest it 's been in decades . The Supreme Court decisions gives the Law solid legal footing . With an election looming , and still stinging from what most in the Republican party thought was going to be a slam-dunk win 4 years ago on a platform of repealing the Act , I think that the wiser leaders of the party know they need to rethink that strategy . As much as they dislike it , the voting electorate does like it , and sadly , many rely on the subsidies to be able to afford their coverage . The adding of Medicaid has progressed slowly but surely , even in the Red States that had spoken out against it , as leaders realize that after the nearly 2 decades of economic pressure , the average American needs the assistance . Even as there seems to be a to tendency to disregard facts in politics , when it comes down to where the votes are coming from , there can be softening or complete reversals of what had been very public stands on issues like health care.With the polling numbers falling solidly in favor of the Act , and the Law being upheld twice in the Supreme Court , I 'd suspect you will hear less talk of repealing the Act . That said , I 'm certain that each candidate will have an opinion on how he or she will change the Law to improve what does n't work as well as it could . There is intense pressure from the insurance companies to regain the incredible profits they were making , and other medical companies also would like to push their agenda 's , so the parts of the law that kept prices low I 'd expect to see attacked . So in short , repealed ? No . Changed ? Probably , depending upon the outcome of the election , and how the public responds to the proposed changes . A great question , and one we in the industry have been watching closely also . Thanks for asking !
ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- signed in to law in 1974 . The primary intent of the law was to provide employee safeguards against abuse if you were a covered participant in a defined benefit pension plan . But the law also extends to certain health and welfare plans including union multi-employer welfare plans and self funded employer group plans .
The law of subrogration applies to indemnity . To indemnify someone is the attempt to `` make them whole '' again , or reimburse them for the specific losses they have incurred . Subrogation compels the guilty party to reimburse the victim , or the insurance company who paid the victim , for those specific losses . It also keeps the Insured person from profiting from a loss by only collecting from the insurance company , and/or from a lawsuit against the guilty party , up to the amount that was lost . Life insurance is not based on indemnity , so the law of subrogation is not applicable to life insurance -LRB- except in possibly some very remote circumstances -RRB- . Therefore , if a person dies from negligence , the beneficiary can collect on the life insurance policy and still collect from a lawsuit paid by negligent party .
What is rebating in Life insurance ? It is a situation where some of the commission earned in the sale of life insurance is given back to the insured as an incentive to close the deal . Rebating is against the law in some states and some companies do not allow rebating in regards to their product . Rebating goes against the fair purchase of life insurance as it creates situations where one person could get a better deal than another for the same product . Sure it 's great if you get some money back but , did you get as much as that other guy ? Did you report your rebate as income to the IRS like your supposed to ? Rebating sort of creates a mess and that is why most states and most insurance companies frown upon it .
In Texas the answer is a big fat `` yes '' because it is against the law to not carry auto insurance but more often the car is towed leaving the driver stranded with a ticket in hand . It is not fair for those that do abide by the law and carry coverage to have to pay the price for those that do n't . Please get some level of insurance with a reputable company that will pay claims such as Allstate , Farmers , Nationwide , State Farm etc
Life insurance unlike health insurance is not required by law . There are scenarios where life insurance can be required such as a loan institution requiring you to carry a life insurance policy large enough to cover the debt in case of death . There are scenarios in court cases such as a divorce where life insurance is court ordered to cover alimony or child support . But over all unlike health insurance on the federal side of the law and car insurance on the state side of the law , life insurance is not required by law .
Depends on what type of ` claim ' it is . Liability ? No Fault ? Comprehensive ? Collision ? A claim against your policy ? Presenting a claim against someone else 's policy ? Is this a bodily Injury or property damage liability claim ? and on and on . This is too general of a question for a short answer . In the auto insurance policy -LRB- a legal contract -RRB- there is a section -LRB- usually near the end of the declarations and forms -RRB- outlining the conditions for reporting or bringing a claim againt the policy . This section will give the guidelines . A recommendation - report all losses or potential claims to your carrier as soon as reasonably possible if not immediately . Regarding a vehicle collision , always contact law enforcement and get plate numbers , descriptions of vehicles , occupants , and names , addresses , and telephone numbers of any witnesses . Please re-submit another question withmore details for a more specific answer .
The official name for `` ObamaCare '' is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- . It is also commonly referred to as Obama care , health care reform and the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- was signed into law to reform the health care industry by President Barack Obama on March 23 , 2010 and upheld by the supreme court on On June 28 , 2012 . The goal of healthcare reform is to give more Americans access to affordable , quality health insurance and to reduce the growth in health care spending in the U.S. . The fact is healthcare reform and the newly opened exchanges do not replace private insurance , Medicare , or Medicaid . If you have health coverage you like , you can keep it . Many of the ACA 's numerous provisions have already been enacted . The rest of the program starts in 2013-2014 and continues to roll out until 2022 . Healthcare reform offers a number of new benefits , rights and protections including the requirement that all new health insurance plans cover preventive services and provide new essential health benefits , this includes everything from yearly check-ups , to maternity care , to mental health , to mammograms and colonoscopies , at no out-of-pocket costs . In addition the ACA includes provisions that let young adults stay on their plan until 26 , stop insurance companies from dropping you when you are sick or if you make an honest mistake on your application , prevent against gender discrimination , stop insurance companies from making unjustified rate hikes , do away with life-time and annual limits , and require all insurers to cover people with pre-existing conditions .
In general terms it means `` you fix yours '' and `` I 'll fix mine '' ... This is typically a State level insurance law as in you live in a No Fault State . How it works in a claim situation , is if you were invovled in an accident with another vehicle - then your insurance would handle damages to your vehicle and any injuries to you or your passengers and the other party 's carrier would do the same to them . There is also stipulations and restrictions on the ability to litigate against another party in No Fault States . The theory with the reduced exposure to litigation , then auto insurance premiums shouldbe able to be kept at a lower level . Call your local independent agent and discuss with them the laws of your state and how they pertain to your question .
If a group health plan , health insurance company , or health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- provides maternity benefits , it may not restrict benefits for a hospital stay in connection with childbirth to less than 48 hours following a vaginal delivery or 96 hours following a delivery by cesarean section.You can not be required to obtain preauthorization from your plan in order for your 48-hour or 96-hour stay to be covered . -LRB- However , certain requirements that you give notice to the plan of the pregnancy or the childbirth may apply . -RRB- The law allows you and your baby to be released earlier than these time periods only if the attending provider decides , after consulting with you , that you or your baby can be discharged earlier.In any case , the attending provider can not receive incentives or disincentives to discharge you or your child earlier than 48 hours -LRB- or 96 hours -RRB- . If your state has a law that provides similar hospital stay protections and your plan offers coverage through an insurance policy or HMO , then you may be protected under state law rather than under the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act . Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
This is a complicated question and really depends upon the insurance laws of your state . No-Fault States : if you live in a no-fault state then you could potentially leave your car in the street without insurance ONLY IF your car is parked in a legal zone and in a safe manner . What I mean by this is you do not want your parked car to be at risk for any liability in the case of an accident . For example , if you are parked on the street outside your house and it is within a couple of inches of the curb and no where near a fire hydrant , then if someone hits your car they will collect against their own insurance and you will not be liable if they sustain any severe physical injuries . However , if your car is in an illegal parking zone or you parked far from the curb , then the person who struck your auto might have cause for a liability suit against you . As a word of caution , just remember that you can get sued regardless of fault and you will have to defend the case until it is dismissed for lack of liability . This means you will still have to pay for an attorney , so it is better to have insurance . Tort-State : you need insurance because they person who hits your parked car will sue you to reclaim collision damages . Please note this is a very brief answer and there are other possible scenarios in both no-fault states and tort-states that can lead to you being sued for having your parked car in the street . I hope this helps .
Health insurance is important because it is the way we finance health care . Health care is expensive with office visits , lab tests , x-rays , and surgery whether inpatient or outpatient . Most people do not have money saved up for medical expenses and therefore purchase health insurance to help pay for medical care . 80 % of Americans spend less than $ 900 annually on medical care and if you are young and healthy you may not think you need health insurance . Health insurance also protects us against large and unexpected medical expenses . The large health care expenses young adults have are usually caused by outdoor activities and sports where injuries can create high medical bills . Those are the main reasons why young adults should purchase health insurance to protect against larger unexpected medical bills .
My colleagues have pretty much hit the nail on the head . The Health Care Reform Act includes provisions that in effect , `` require '' everyone to be covered by an approved health insurance plan , be it a group or individual contract . The general idea is that if everyone in the United States is covered , then not only will everyone have more access to health care with a means to pay for it , but the costs will be lesser because the insured pool is larger . One of the foundation principals of any insurance is referred to as `` the law of large numbers '' . THis concept means that the larger the pool of insured folks sharing the risk , the more affordable the insurance . That having been said , the rules of the game with our system now certainly do `` strongly encourage '' everyone to have health insurance . And the consequences of chooosing to go against this are some pretty hefty additional taxes that can grow larger with each passing year . Bottom line , please obtain the insurance .
Regardless if Donald Trump or any other candidate wins the Presidential election and promises to repeal the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare as you referred to it , it is not very likely . There are a lot of steps to repeal a law of this magnitude other than who is sitting in the White House . Consider the Supreme Court upheld it not once but twice . It will take two thirds majority of the House and Senate to repeal a law of this size . There have been numerous health insurance companies go out of business or sell to other larger insurance companies . There is an estimated 100,000 plus health insurance agents that surrendered their licenses due to this law . To repeal it , would open the lane to lawsuits galore , not the Federal government , but many levels and agencies that can be sued . Like it or hate it , I believe the ACA law is here to stay in one form or another .
Ethics is a big debate on many laws not just health insurance . Unfortunately like so many laws ethics can vary since so many people these days have a different code of ethics . With that being said the law is you must have health insurance or be penalized for not having the coverage .
That is a great question , and one I get a lot ! The first reason that you should have insurance is that it is required by law to have . If you are going to drive , you 'd better have a policy . The penalties for driving uninsured are stiff , and have long lasting negative effects . The second good reason is that generally people do n't have the money laying around to purchase a second car when theirs is damaged or destroyed in an accident . The insurer picks up the tab -LRB- after deductible -RRB- instead of you , when you have insurance.The third reason is to protect against damages from a lawsuit filed as a result of an accident , having the insurer pay instead of seeing your check garnished is a really good thing . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
Technically you do not have to have homeowners insurance . It is not required at this time by law in any of the states in the United States to the best of my knowledge . Your mortgage lender will typically require homeowners insurance coverage to protect themselves against loss in the event of a covered loss . There are way to many reasons to list here as to why you should have coverage . Please contact a local agent to discuss your coverage needs and concerns .
I assume you are referring to ACA -LRB- affordable care act -RRB- also known as Obamacare . What the law means to you will vary according to your need and income level . Individuals who have previously been denied health insurance due to pre-existing medical conditions will be able to purchase coverage without regard to their medical history . Low income individuals -LRB- as defined by the law -RRB- will be eligible -LRB- at least in some states -RRB- to enroll in Medicaid under an expansion provision . Others who earn less than 400 % of the FPL -LRB- federal poverty level -RRB- may be eligible for premium subsidies but only if they apply for coverage through the health insurance exchange . The numerous changes mandated by Obamacare will result in fewer choices and considerably higher health insurance premiums . This politically charged law has thorns among the roses .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Often Will Medicare Pay For A Glucose Meter ?
Most diabetic supplies are covered under Medicare Part B including blood sugar monitors , test strips and lancets . Medicare sets a limit on the number of lancets you can get during a 90 day period . If you need more your doctor must certify they are medically necessary . Medicare will not pay for any supplies -LRB- icluding monitors -RRB- sent to you directly that you did not order . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier that accepts assignment .
As far as I know , all glucose meters are covered under Medicare Part B . If the equipment provider is an approved Medicare provider , there should be no problem . You can find Medicare approved providers by following this link WEBSITELINK Enter your zip code the follow the prompts to locate Medicare suppliers .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance - when you have both of these , it 's commonly referred to as `` Original Medicare '' . Services and procedures performed to treat the diabetes condition would be covered by Medicare . Original Medicare only covers about 80 % of the expenses - you can supplement the Original Medicare coverage with a Medigap plan to cover a portion or all of the other 20 % of healthcare expenses -LRB- there 's 10 different standardized plans and you 'll want to consult with an experienced Medigap broker to determine the one that 's right for your needs and budget -RRB- . Prescriptions to treat diabetes -LRB- e.g. insulin , metformin , etc. -RRB- would be covered under a Part D plan that supplements your Original Medicare coverage . Refer to your plans formulary to see if a specific prescription is covered . Glucose meters , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets can be covered under Part B as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Glucose meters -LRB- blood sugar monitors -RRB- are covered by Medicare Part B as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- that your doctor prescribes for use in the home . The company that makes the device is not going to change whether or not it 's covered under Part B. Medicare Part B covers approximately 80 % of the cost and you 're responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay your portion of the cost of the blood sugar monitor .
Glucose meters -LRB- blood sugar monitors -RRB- are covered by Medicare Part B as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- when your doctor prescribes for use in the home . The company that makes the device is not going to change whether or not it 's covered under Part B. Medicare Part B covers approximately 80 % of the cost and you 're responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay your portion of the cost of the blood sugar monitor .
Medicare is concerned about diabetes type II and includes coverage for many diabetes testing equipment and supplies . Your doctor must prescribe your diabetic supplies . Some of the Medicare Part B covered items include testing strips , glucose meters , lancets and insulin but ONLY IF it is used in a pump . Levemir flexpen 's are part of Medicare Part D . If your drug plan includes the flexpen under the formulary some of the cost may be reimbursed .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
Medicare Part B covers some diabetic supplies , including blood glucose testing monitors , blood glucose test strips , lancets , lancet devices , and glucose control solutions . People with diabetes may receive shoe inserts to prevent foot sores , and some may even receive therapeutic shoes . Medicare Part D covers syringes and other supplies associated with the administration of insulin .
When you rent a car you are responsible for any accident you might have with the car and are also responsible to return the car to the agency in the same condition as when you rented it . While the insurance offered by the rental company may be overpriced they do not do any of the underwriting and investigation of the driver that a normal insurance company will do . That makes their selection process less critical and their prices higher . The advantage of the insurance that they offer is that you can return the automobile or tell the company where the automobile is located and the insurance that you purchased from them will complete your contract with the rental company -LRB- that is not a legal opinion , just an observation . -RRB- The coverage on your current automobile extends to a car that you have rented . If you have inadequate coverage on your private automobile you will have inadequate coverage on the rental car . If you are involved in an accident the rental company will try to keep the meter running on the rental agreement if you dont have their insurance .
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
Diabetes Supplies & Services Supplies : Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- covers some diabetes supplies , including : Blood sugar -LRB- glucose -RRB- test strips Blood sugar testing monitors Insulin Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions Therapeutic shoes or inserts Part B covers some diabetes services , including : Diabetes self-management training Yearly eye exam Foot exam Glaucoma tests Nutrition therapy services -LRB- medical -RRB-
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . Consult with an experienced Medigap broker to see which plan would be most suitable for your specific needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part D does cover some diabetic supplies . Part D will cover supplies that are used for administration of insulin -LRB- syringes , needles , alcohol swabs , gauze and inhaled insulin devices -RRB- . Medicare Part B covers diabetic supplies such as blood glucose monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets .
Yes , Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . This includes wheelchairs , nebulizers , blood glucose monitors , hospital style beds and more . For them to cover it , you need a valid prescription from the doctor which includes your name , date of birth , address , the type of DME that you need , the duration of time you will need it for , and a diagnosis code for the condition it is treating . With that prescription , any medical supply store that is contracted with Medicare will be able to provide the equipment .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . Medicare covers a lot of parts to diabetic care , but some of it will have to be covered by other means . For specific diabetic benefits , your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- will cover certain testing supplies and services including blood sugar testing monitors and testing strips , lancet devices and lancets , and glucose control solutions . These items are considered durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- and would be covered under Part B. Prescriptions such as insulin and metformin -LRB- common treatment medicines for diabetes -RRB- would be covered under a Part D prescription drug plan - Part B would not provide coverage for these types of diabetic care items . Original Medicare only covers 80 % of the expenses so you may want to consider adding a Medigap plan to cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . Consult with an experienced broker who can review your specific medical history and help you determine the best course of action for your needs . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most people with diabetes can get life insurance . Children with type 1 diabetes are the notable exception ; it is very difficult to find a policy for them until they are at least age 18 . All the more reason to add your children to a child rider or get them a policy of their own while they are very young , especially if diabetes runs in the family . The types of policies that you can get while having diabetes , are as varied as the persons with type 1 , 1.5 , 2 , or gestational diabetes . Underwriters will look at your history of control , with A1C being the dominant indicator , but also at whether you have current complications such as neuropathy , heart disease , or kidney disease . They will look at your age of diagnosis , the length of time you have had diabetes , and the types of treatments you have had . Based on all this data , the insurance company will determine how to rate you . People with diabetes can be rated Preferred all the way to a high table rating . If your blood glucose is too high or you have too many complications to get a medically underwritten policy , there are simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies available for most people . Contact an impaired risk life insurance specialist with experience in life insurance for people with diabetes , to be sure that you get placed with a company that will approve you at the best possible rate .
A urinalysis costs approximately $ 35 - $ 60 , depending where you live and what facility is used to conduct the test . Typically , it is part of a routine examination or annual physical . Many items are checked with this type of testincludingyour liver and glucose . If you have existing medical coverage and the test is considered preventive , the insurer may pay for the entire cost .
The blood test used for life insurance exams tests for HIV , cholesterol and other lipids , drug use , cotinine -LRB- a metabolyte of nicotine -RRB- , liver function , kidney function , and blood glucose . While not testing for specific diseases , the blood test results can point to a variety of diseases and further documentation may be ordered if exam results are questionable .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Earn Interest ?
Does Life Insurance earn interest ? There is one other way , other than the 2 answers given by Peggy Mace or Steve Savant , this is the interest that a Life insurance Company will pay on the death claim , from the date of death . This interest could accumulate if thee had been an investigation , or if the claim payment was delayed .
One of the crediting methods of life insurance is interest accumulation . Interest is generally credited after the policy expenses have been deducted from the cash value account . There are other crediting methods that use indices , both domestic and foreign as well as equities and bonds in separate sub accounts in variable life products .
If you purchase a permanent policy such as Universal Life , Whole Life , or Indexed Universal Life , the life insurance policy will earn interest . It will have a guaranteed interest rate and an interest rate that it `` could '' earn , which is higher than the guaranteed interest rate . Term life insurance does not earn interest .
A term life insurance policy does not earn interest , either in the cash value or face amount . It does not earn interest on the cash value because there is no cash value in term life . The death benefit is exactly what you purchased , and does not grow due to interest earned . Permanent insurance does earn interest . However , it is not as simple as putting money in a savings account and having the cash grow by a certain percent . A current illustration will show how your premium is applied to the costs in your policy , and how much it will grow at the stated interest rate .
If you purchase a permanent policy such as Universal Life , Whole Life , or Indexed Universal Life , the life insurance policy will earn interest . It will have a guaranteed interest rate and an interest rate that it `` could '' earn , which is higher than the guaranteed interest rate . Term life insurance does not earn interest .
There are different types of interest associated with a life insurance policy and they are treated differently for tax purposes . `` Interest '' earned inside a cash value policy such as a Universal Life policy is not taxed while it is inside the plan . There are limits to the cash value to death benefit ratio to keep it tax exempt from accrual taxation . `` Interest '' earned on dividends held on deposits with a participating policy such as a Whole Life policy is taxed as interest income as earned . `` Interest '' earned on a death benefit before it is disbursed is taxable as interest income . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Putting money in a tax deferred annuity in very simple terms means the money paid into the annuity is growing without being taxed while in the annuity . The taxes are `` deferred '' until you start withdrawing the money to use usually for retirement . The hope is when you retire you will be in a lower tax bracket than when you were earning income . It can also be described as triple compounding meaning the dollar you put in earns interest , the dollar of interest earns interest and the dollar you owe Uncle Sam earns interest .
The cash value of any whole life policy earns interest . The amount of interest is contractual in a whole life policy . That interest rate reflects the companys anticipated earnings . An indexed universal life looks to an established external index to determine the interest rate . This could be the Dow Jones Average , Standard and Poors or several others . These indexes then provide the insurance company with the interest that they are to apply to the policy . The interest rate isnt guaranteed , although some policies will not charge negative interest if the index dips below zero .
A participating whole life insurance policy pays annual dividends . The dividends represent the favorable performance of the insurance company and are the result of excess earnings investments , favorable mortality rates and savings on expenses . Dividends can be paid in cash , used to offset your premiums , or used to purchase additional paid up insurance which will increase your policy 's face value . The premium you pay to the insurance company is generally divided in three different ways . First , there is the actual `` cost of insurance '' . The cost of insurance is a specific charge associated with the death benefit that takes into consideration your age and `` rating '' when the policy was originally issued . Another portion of your premium covers operating costs and company profits . The final portion is put into the cash value of your policy . Another type of life insurance that will last your entire life is called Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- . An IUL is permanent life insurance that offers a death benefit and your premiums may earn interest and grow the cash value of the policy . What makes an IUL different from whole life is the way interest is credited to the policy 's cash value . IUL 's offer the ability to earn interest that is linked to the movement of a selected stock index over a specific period of time . With an IUL , your money is not participating directly in the stock market . If the referenced market index drops in value , you simply do not have interest credited for that year .
All life insurance costs are based upon life expectancy , earnings and overhead . These in combination result in the cost for one year of coverage . When the period to be protected is longer than one year then there must be consideration given to the total cost of coverage and the earnings the company could anticipate . This is where you get a premium for a 10 , 20 , or 30 year term policy . Permanent insurance does not have a termination date and as a result must consider every conceivable coverage cost and establish a program where the earnings of the policy will be sufficient to meet those obligations as they arise . Whole Life is the traditional way to handle this issue and the company designs a plan that will provide a level amount of protection for the remainder of the insureds life in exchange for a level premium . A universal life policy differs from the whole life policy in that the earnings are not guaranteed . The company maintains a separate fund . This fund will have earnings that are different from the general fund . If the earnings are greater the cost of the policy will be lower , reflecting the earnings . Because the earnings are not guaranteed they change from year to year . This affects the companys ability to pay the full death claim . Each company issues an annual statement that shows the values and projected values . The insured can reduce or increase premiums at their own discretion .
As soon as possible . If you want to protect your assets like your house , any debt or taxes owed if something should happen to you . Last thing you want to do is have a financial burden on your family . If your looking at saving for the future , specifically retirement planning , than life insurance is a great product to have . Tax deferred and tax free are two of the most important things you want to know and understand . If you mixed that earning a rate of return on your money , and compound interest than you have the best of three worlds . Saving , interest , earning interest on top of the interest you just earned while having it all be tax free . Actually the best of 4 worlds lol .
Interest earnings within a life insurance policy are not taxable as are loans against the policy . However , the entire interest earnings WILL be taxable if the policy lapses for any reason , therefore you will want to contact the customer service dept. of the life insurance company prior to a lapse to find out the amount of interest earnings BEFORE you make such a decision .
Earned income comes from the IRS regulations as a qualifier for being able to contribute to a Roth IRA . It means you must earn compensation through work you have performed for your efforts in one form or another . There are two ways to receive earned income : 1 -RRB- Work for someone who pays you -LRB- you 'll receive a W-2 -RRB- 2 -RRB- You own or operate a business or farm -LRB- Schedule C will be filed with your tax return -RRB- The IRS defines earned income as wages , salary , tips and other taxable employee pay ; Union strike benefits ; Long-term disability benefits received prior to minimum retirement age ; net earnings from self-employment if you own or operate your own farm or business ; income as a minister or member of a religious order or a statutory employee and have income . There are plenty of categories that are not counted as earned income . Here are examples of income that are NOT considered earned income : Interest and dividends , retirement income , Social Security benefits , Unemployment benefits , alimony , child support , pay received while an inmate in a penal institution . The bottom line is the IRS wants to make sure you are performing work that will ultimately get them more tax revenue before they will let you pour more money into a tax deferred or tax exempt vehicle .
That is a great question ! A tax deferred annuity is a great way to helpfund a retirement plan . In this type of vehicle , the money that you put into the annuity grows steadily . The interest that it earns stays in the annuity , and is n't counted yearly as income , so is n't taxable . Once the point comes when you start taking payments from it however , that earned interest becomes taxable , and is counted as income . Everything in the annuity over the amount that you started with is considered taxable income and you will count the interest on your taxes each year that you receive payments . The idea behind this strategy is that once you 've retired , you 've dropped in your yearly earnings , and thus into a lower tax bracket , and yet again saved money . If you would like more detail on this financial tool , please contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Whenever you deposit money into an account , be it at your bank , credit union , or annuity fund , that money does n't just sit there in a box labelled `` you '' . The financial institution immediately takes the money from the `` you '' box , and uses it to cover their expenses , pay out someone else , or invest it to make their profits . When you take that money out early , it costs them , as they were planning on it being there until the annuitization phase of your annuity was scheduled to begin . Now they have to scramble to get the money back into the `` you '' box . That often costs them money from the interest they were earning by using the money you 'd put in your `` box '' . To recapture some of their loss , and to act as an incentive to deter you from pulling out your `` box '' early , they assess the surrender charges . You will notice that they are highest at the beginning of your annuity , and decrease as time goes on . That is because the longer your money stays with them , the more likely it is that they 've earned what they needed to to repay your money with it 's promised interest . Does that help ? I hope so , feel free to contact me if it does n't , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Life insurance policies that are designed for cash accumulation build up a reserve of cash that you can borrow from at any time for any purpose . You ca n't borrow 100 % of the cash in your policy , but usually up to 90 or 95 % depending on several variables . You can take a fixed loan from your policy which means the cash comes out of your account and you stop earning interest on this money . The charge for a fixed loan is usually very low -LRB- 0 -2 % , depending on policy -RRB- . The second type of loan is called a variable loan or participating loan . With this loan , the money comes out of the insurance company 's general account , so your money remains in your account earning compound interest . The interest rate for this type of loan is higher - usually 5 % or more or a variable rate . The amazing feature of this loan is that you can borrow money at 5 % -LRB- for example -RRB- , but your money may be in your account earning 7 % or more , creating a positive arbitrage . Borrowing against your life insurance policy can be an excellent option , but you should discuss the pros and cons of this strategy with a knowledgeable advisor .
The fact that it is a Roth IRA is irrelevant . The doubling of an investment has to do with the interest rate it is earning . If you use the Rule of 72 , a formula by Albert Einstein , it is a great measurement of doubling money . The rule is simple , divide the number 72 by the interest rate you are receiving -LRB- 72/10 = 7.2 -RRB- , and you will find the number of years it will take to double your money . It is called the Rule of 72 because at 10 % interest , the money will double every 7.2 years . So in order to double your Roth IRA every 7 years it must be earning just over 10 % . This is a very aggressive estimate with current interest rates around 1 % to 2 % .
If by `` investment '' , you mean something that may gain or lose value , then the only type of life insurance that I would consider an investment is Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- . The interest credited to a VUL policy is based on stocks & bonds and may be positive or negative for the year . There are other types of life insurance that can accumulate cash called whole life and universal life policies . I consider these savings vehicles rather than investment vehicles because they do not lose money due to a decrease in the stock market or index . Whole Life insurance accumulates cash by dividends that are declared by the life insurance company . Universal life , other than VUL , comes in a fixed and an indexed universal life option . The Fixed UL earns interest based on a rate declared by the insurance company . The Indexed option -LRB- IUL -RRB- earns interest based on the performance of an index such as the S & P. With an IUL , there is usually a floor of 0 - 2 % that protects the cash value if the index is negative . The nice thing about an IUL is that you participate in the upside of the market without the downside risk . These are complex products and it is important to speak with a knowledgeable advisor who can educate you on the fees and other particulars .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Who Pays For Long Term Disability Insurance ?
If you 're employer offers long term disability insurance , you 'd be smart to accept the coverage , even if you do need to pay part of the premium . But do n't forget to look into private DI as well . A lot of group plans do n't offer the max amount you 're allowed , and it 's essential to be fully covered .
If you are employed by a company that offers Long Term Disability insurance , your employer normally pays for it , although they might offer it to you as an option where you pay part or all of the premium . If you are self employed , or work for an employer that does not offer Long Term Disability insurance , you can purchase and pay for a private policy yourself .
There are two basic types of long term disability . The first is group disability which is paid for by your employer either in part or in whole . The down side to having an employer pay for your disability is he takes the deductions at tax time and if you have a claim all of your disability benefits are taxable as income because you did not pay the premiums . The second type of long term disability is an individual policy that you pay for directly . These are not usually tax deductible to an individual . However , if you receive benefits from a claim this money is tax free to you because you were taxed on the premiums .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Long Term Disability and Long Term Care have similar names , so it is easy to see how they can be confused . Long Term Disability is for those who are employed , and the benefit they receive would replace part of the income lost by suffering a long term disability . Long Term Care is for those who are in need of skilled care , and the benefit received either goes straight to the institution providing the care , or to the person receiving the care , to use as they wish .
The two main types of disability insurance are short term disability , and long term disability insurance . Short term disability insurance pays fairly quickly after a disabling illness or injury occurs , and benefits generally last no longer than two years . Long term disability insurance has a longer waiting period until it pays , usually around 90 days . Then it can last a number of years or all the way to retirement in the event of a disability that continues that long .
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
No these are two totally separate types of insurance plans used to cover totally different needs . Disability insurance can be either long term or short term . Long term disability is used to replace your income for the rest of your working life . It usually has a bit longer elimination period 90-180-360 days before benefits begin to pay . The benefits can pay as long as age 67 when social security benefits start . A short term disability insurance plan pays benefits sooner within days , but only lasts a few months or up to a couple of years . Both disability insurance plans are insuring most peoples most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . Disability insurance should be purchased when a person starts working for a living . Long term care insurance is meant to cover a person that can no longer care for themselves . The person needs home health care , assisted living or a nursing home . Usually the time to purchase a long term care policy is when a person gets older , typically in their 50s or 60s , but some wait until their 70s . It really depends more upon their health and lifestyle . Just do n't wait until you have been diagnosed with an affliction , then is too late .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Long term disability insurance pays you a large portion of your paycheck if you are unable to work due to a long term illness or injury . If you or your dependents rely on your paycheck to pay essential bills , and do not have enough in savings to tide you over for over 6 months , you have a need for long term disability insurance . A long term DI policy can provide income to you for many years , even a lifetime . Becoming disabled , either temporarily or permanently , is a much more common an occurrence than most people think . Having long term disability insurance can protect you and your family from some of the trauma , if such a misfortune should happen to you .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Can A Landlord Require Renters Insurance In New Hampshire ?
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
New Hampshire does not require you to have auto insurance . However , you are required , by law , to meet the Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility Requirements . If you can no meet these requirements , your license may be suspended . Sufficient funds must be available in case you have an accident that is your fault . The requirements are $ 25,000 per person , $ 50,000 per accident and an additional $ 25,000 of property damage . $ 1,000 of medical payments coverage is required if the vehicle is for personal use . Most persons purchase car insurance policies . An experienced broker will provide the lowest available rates for you in New Hampshire from the best carriers .
Taxed depends a lot on what exactly is going on . Death benefits are not taxed for income purposes -LRB- as is the case with the majority of policies in all states -RRB- . And New Hampshire has no estate tax . Distributions from a life insurance policy that are not a return of basis are recognized as income , but since New Hampshire does not have an income tax , there would be no income tax due on those distributions .
The federal govt . does not require auto insurance . Auto insurance is regulated at the state level . With the exception of the state of New Hampshire , every state has at least a state minimum liability coverage requirement . Some states also require medical coverage -LRB- aka PIP -RRB- , and some states require uninsured motorist coverage as well .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
That is a great question ! Car insurance is required in almost every State in America . Even in the ones that do n't , you have to be able to prove that you can pay for damages caused in an accident . If you are looking for the state with the least requirements , it used to be New Hampshire , but that may have changed since I lived out east . It is safe to say that it is required almost everywhere that you can go . It makes sense to have it , and can be devastating to you if you do n't . Thanks for asking !
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
Virginia does not require you to carry car insurance as long as you pay an uninsured motor vehicle fee to the state . New Hampshire and Mississippi will offer vehicle owners the option to post a cash bond . All other states will require you to maintain auto insurance to operate a motor vehicle on the roadways .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Life insurance is usually not charge income tax in New Hampshire or any other state . The face amount of the policy is income tax free when passed to a beneficiary who is a person , charity , trust , or other entity . It can be charged income tax if passed to the estate .
Life insurance proceeds are generally not taxable in New Hampshire unless they are left to the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , or the death benefit goes to the estate because no beneficiaries are alive , the proceeds will be charged taxes and fees along with all the property in the estate . Federal estate taxes do apply to life insurance proceeds if over the exempted amount of $ 5,250,000 -LRB- in 2013 -RRB- . There are no state inheritance or estate taxes in New Hampshire .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
If it is included in your renters contract , renters insurance can be required . This is actually a very smart thing , both for the renter and for the landlord . The renters insurance will protect your property in case of fire or theft , and it helps protect the landlord in case of a liability claim . Also , landlord insurance is generally cheaper if renters insurance is required .
In New York there are few variations in the renters policy . The basic policy covers Personal Property , Additional Living Expense , Medical Payments , and Personal Liability . Many insurance carriers use their own policy forms and endorsements . A reputable agent or broker will have a specimen policy available and can outline the various coverages . Your Personal Property can be covered for Actual Cash Value or Replacement Cost . A good insurance representative can explain the difference in terms you can understand . The standard renters policy provides ` named perils ' on your personal property . ` Open perils ' commonly known as ` all risk ' is also available for more premium . Deductibles for the property coverage start at $ 100 or $ 250 and go up from there . The higher the deductible , the more the savings in premium . Many landlords require their tenants carry renters insurance and provide evidence of it - so if this is your situation , find out what the requirements are . Most insurance carriers in NY will not add the landlord as an ` additional insured ' under the personalliability section . Sometimes landlords request this in the rental agreement . Usually , a copy of the declarations page will satisfy the landlord .
WellPoint Health Networks , Inc. merged with Anthem where the name WellPoint , Inc. was adopted . WellPoint is an independent company of the BCBS Association . WellPoint is nowthe largest managed health care company in the Blue Cross and Blue Shield family association serving California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indian , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia , Washington D.C. , and Wisconsin . It operates under other names in the mentioned states as Blue Cross , Anthem and UniCare .
In some States , the Law requires for all Tenant Lease Contracts to include a clause requiring tenants to purchase and provide proof of Renters Insurance to the Landlord . In most States , this is not the case . However , a Landlord has the right to require a tenant to responsibly be insured as part of the agreement ; as long as both the Landlord and Tenant sign the Lease , it is a legal agreement . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and provides a huge protection to both the Landlord and the Tenant in the event of a claim . The minimum amount of Personal Liability is $ 100,000 on most contracts and has no associated deductible ; the minimum amount of Personal Property coverage could be as low as $ 20,000 to which the policy deductible will apply . In order to generate the lowest premium for those uninterested in coverage but required to purchase coverage , one should obtain a quote for the minimum liability limit , the minimum personal property coverage and the maximum deductible . Providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
end question
start question
annuities
When Do You Pay Taxes On Annuities ?
It depends what type of Annuity it is and if the Annuity is in a Qualified Retirement Account or not . If it is in a Qualified account , like an IRA/401k/SEP , then any distribution is 100 % taxable . If it is a non-qualified account , then only withdrawals of the gain are taxed -LRB- as income -RRB- . But since Annuities use LIFO , the gain will be the first part of the Annuity that is distributed . The growth of a non-qualified Fixed Annuity is tax deferred . If it is an Immediate Annuity/Lifetime Annuity , then again it depends on the tax status . For a Qualified account 100 % of the distributions/income will be taxable . For non-qualified , a portion of the payments will be tax-free and considered a `` return of basis/premium '' .
A non-qualified annuity defers taxation until money is withdrawn . When money is withdrawn the gain on the policy is treated as ordinary income , while the money invested is merely a return and therefore not taxed . If the annuity is in an IRA it is fully taxed as ordinary income when it is withdrawn and may be subject to mandatory distributions and even tax penalties . If the annuity is in a Roth IRA and meets all the requirements it can be withdrawn free of any income tax .
You pay taxes , ordinary income taxes when you take distributions of gain in the policy . Tax deferral can be a powerful feature of an annuity over time . Paying taxes only when you use the gain in the contract can provide an advantage over traditional CDs which tax the CD owner regardless of whether they use the money or not .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
Annuities are always taxable when gain is withdrawn from the annuity unless the annuity is placed inside a Roth account . Annuities do defer taxes when no money is removed from the annuity , so if no withdrawal , the gain is not realized until it is withdrawn from the annuity . Annuities use the Last in Last out -LRB- LIFO -RRB- accounting rule , which means gain in the annuity must be withdrawn before basis is removed , unless the annuity is annuitized . For annuities with a cost basis -LRB- i.e. non tax deducted/qualified -RRB- annuitization uses a tax rule known as the exclusion ratio to make part of the income stream gain and part non-taxable basis .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In Canada , immediate and deferred annuities are , with one exception , taxed on an accrual basis . The growth or income is taxed as earned , not as received . How the income is taxed , depends , if it is interest income or , in the case of Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , interest , dividends or capital gains . Prescribed Annuities enjoy special taxation -LRB- Section 304 of Income Tax Act -RRB- . They are taxed on a straight line basis rather than on an accrual basis . If you qualify for a prescribed annuity then total amount of `` expected '' interest is averaged based on the number of payments . For example invest in a prescribed life income annuity and your `` life expectancy '' is 22 years . The amount of investment DIVIDED BY `` life expectancy '' EQUALS return of your principle and it is not taxed . The annuity payment SUBTRACT the return of your principle is taxable . The tax savings can be substantial , which is why prescribed annuities are often used to increase after tax income . Especially for those who prefer guaranteed interest income . A life insurance policy can replace the capital for your estate . Depending on the the individual circumstances , increases of after tax income can be 50 % or more . Implementing a strategy involving payout annuities is sometimes complicated , it is however , always permanent . Search for Retirement / Financial planner in your area . Then look for an experienced life insurance broker with a professional designation such as a CLU or CFP . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please contact me .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Yes , annuity income is taxed . The growth inside the annuity is tax deferred during the accumulation phase , but when you start the annuitization or distribution phase , where you start collecting payments , you will need to start paying income taxes on them . If you receive the payment as a lump sum , you will pay taxes on the difference between what you paid in and what you were paid . Not only can annuities be a good source of retirement income , but most people are in a lower tax bracket when they retire , so that the taxes do not sting as much .
Variable Annuities are taxed just the same as a traditional Fixed Annuity . If the Annuity is not in an IRA or other Qualified Plan , then any withdrawal is subject to capitol gains tax , both Federal and State . This is just on the `` Gains '' of the policy . If the Annuity is in an IRA or Qualified Retirement Plan , then withdrawals are taxed as Income . It is also important to note that any withdrawal before age 591/2 , is subject to a 10 % tax penalty . This is for IRA & non IRA Annuities . If the Annuity is a Variable Immediate Annuity , which pays an income stream to you , then things are a bit different . If it is an IRA then all income payments are taxed as Income . If it is not an IRA , then it is taxed under the exclusion ration . This `` excludes '' a certain percentage of the income from taxes , since it is considered basis -LRB- principle -RRB- .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
While the answer is - `` YES '' , you can combine annuities - it is important to bear in mind that some annuities have different tax treatment than others . My advice is to only combine annuity money of a similar nature with that of another . For example , an IRA -LRB- individual Retirement Account -RRB- provides a deduction on the IRS 1040 against income . Because of this feature and tax benefit , all money coming out of an IRA , both interest and basis , are taxed as income upon distribution . In other words , because of the tax deduction , distributions from an IRA are taxed as if all the money coming from the account is being taxed for the first time . An ordinary tax qualified annuity , a non-IRA annuity , incurs taxation only on the gain at the time of distribution . This exclusion formula recognizes that some of the money deposited was already taxed as ordinary income when you first earned it and this money will not be taxed again at distribution . That is why I suggest honoring the character of the money and keeping IRA 's with IRA 's , etc. . This simple rule of thumb will help relieve you of explaining years later the source or the money and help you argue successfully that some money should not be taxed . Who among us will remember 30-40 years hence how these accounts were merged ? There are a whole other set of rules for conversions and methods to avoid taxation prior to annuitization and the beginning of the payout period of your annuities . This answer covers general theory only on the idea you want to minimize taxation to the largest extent possible .
Annuities are used for retirement as a source of regular income . Your annuity is tax deferred until you take out payments . The contributions you put into an annuity are not taxed , and the earnings are taxed at your tax rate during retirement . Therefore , they can be a tax favorable way of earning supplemental income during retirement . If you take out an immediate annuity , you contribute a lump sum and can begin to take out regular payments nearly immediately . A deferred annuity allows you to make payments into it over a number of years , then annuitize the annuity to receive regular payments . These payments are generally used to add to Social Security benefits and other income during retirement . Variable annuities make your annuity more of an investment , with the risks that come with variable products . Indexed annuities also allow for more growth but protect the original contribution .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Private Health Insurance Cover Ct Scans ?
As a general rule health insurance does cover CT scans . It may be listed under your `` xray section '' of the policy . If your membership card has a customer service phone number you should be able to call the company and givee all your policy information and the details of the scan and they can tell you what is covered
In order for the CT scan to be covered by Medicare , it must be deemed medically necessary via doctor 's orders , and Medicare must agree with the order . The Computerized Axial Tomography -LRB- CT -RRB- scan must be performed by a health care provider who participates in Medicare . Medicare Part A covers CT scans performed in a hospital or skilled nursing facility ; Medicare Part B covers CT scans performed as an outpatient .
Private health insurance plans to cover CT also known as CAT scans when the procedure is considered medically necessary as a diagnostic tool . CT scans are quite expensive and sometimes overused by doctors when a less expensive test could yield the desired information . If in question , and this is a non-emergency situation , consult with your insurance carrier before scheduling the scan .
Medicare will pay for a medically necessary CT scan . Your doctor must document why the scan is needed . Medicare does not publish their fee schedules but you can get an idea of how much Medicare will pay for a CT scan if you Google Medicare DRG rates or Medicare payment schedule .
Most major medical health insurance policies will cover CAT -LRB- CT -RRB- scans , as well as PET , MRI and X-rays ... all of which are diagnostic tests . Because CT scans can be quite expensive , if the carrier decides the scan was not the most cost effective method of diagnosing a condition , the claim may be denied .
Depending on your policy the general answer is yes . How much it covers depends on your policy and the reason for the CT scan . I recommend checking with your insurance company to find out if the procedure is covered before having the CT scan done . It could save you paying out money you were n't counting on .
As a general rule health insurance does cover CT scans . It may be listed under your `` xray section '' of the policy . If your membership card has a customer service phone number you should be able to call the company and givee all your policy information and the details of the scan and they can tell you what is covered
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have cancer ? Well , it depends upon a lot of questions . The type of cancer diagnosed , the date first diagnosis occurred . I need to know was it treated by surgery , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , hormonal therapy . I 'll also need to know , enlist the stage of the cancer , as well as the grade of the cancer . I need to know also , has it spread to other parts of the body , because that 's going to be issue for us to be able to underwrite . And then the last one is has there been proper follow ups to your cancer ? Which is CT scans , X-rays , bone scans , laboratory work . I need to know those kinds of things to accumulate enough information to give you the proper offer . Remember , certain carriers are more benevolent in certain types of cancers than others .
Like most other forms of insurance , you may not feel the premium is worth paying ... until you need it . Homeowners insurance is a total waste of money until you have a major insured loss . Medicare Part B covers much more than a doctor visit . Also covered are diagnostic tests such as MRI and CT scans as well as infusion therapy . Consider a Medigap to cover Part B deductibles and coinsurance .
Medicare Part B covers most outpatient treatment that Medicare considers medically necessary . Just a few of your covered expenses include doctor visits , lab work , X-rays , CT scans , MRI , medical transport -LRB- ambulance -RRB- , Emergency Room , outpatient surgery , infusion therapy in a clinic or hospital setting . Some infusion drugs are also covered by Part B.
Medicare does not publish their fee schedule to the public , but you can get an idea of the Medicare allowance for MRI , CT scans , etc. . You can check out healthcarebluebook dot com as a resource and get an idea of fees . You can also Google Medicare DRG rates or Medicare payment schedule for information
Medicare Part B covers diagnostic tests , including CT Scans , when your doctor has determined it is needed to help diagnose a medical problem . Part B will pay for 80 % of the expenses - you 're responsible for paying the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan would cover these expenses .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B , but why would you want to ? Medicare Part B is for more than just doctor visits . Part B also covers outpatient diagnostic testing , labs , X-ray , CT scans , MRI , Emergency Room , ambulance and much more . Chemotherapy is also a covered Medicare Part B expense .
X-rays , CT scans , MRI and most diagnostic imaging tests are a covered item under Medicare Part B -LRB- and sometimes A -RRB- . Your doctor must have evaluated you personally and ordered the test as part of his or her diagnostic procedure . The imaging facility , clinic or doctors office will bill Medicare directly .
Health insurance came into being to help pay for catastrophic -LRB- large -RRB- medical claims . Initially health insurance plans only covered inpatient hospital stays . Over time some medical care that could only be handled as an inpatient became available on an outpatient basis . Also , new prescription drugs were developed to treat illness that earlier had been considered incurable . As these new -LRB- and quite expensive -RRB- drugs came on the market health insurance was expanded to cover outpatient services including Rx , extensive diagnostic testing such as MRI and CT scans and outpatient surgery .
If you are referring to private individual or group health insurance major medical plans then the answer is yes . Now , the access to MRI scans will vary with the differenttypes of health insurance plans are person could be enrolled in . Under some policies it 's a very straight forward process that once your doctor orders one you go get it and it 's paid for under whatever deductible , copay and/or co-insurance provisions apply to such services under your health insurance contract . In other health plan environments there may be a pre-certification/pre-approval requirement before the insurance company will cover an MRI -LRB- I 'm assuming this is n't an emergency need -RRB- . If you are covered under such a contract it is important that you and/or your physician obtain the required pre-authorization before the MRI is performed in order to assure your claim is paid at in-network levels or not declined for payment in the most extreme circumstances .
Congratulations ! You have asked the question that millions of Americans are struggling with and will be struggling with for years to come . Without being self-serving to my industry , find yourself an experienced and well qualified health insurance agent to shop the market for you and to explain the fine details of the options available to you . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- has accomplished what many thought impossible - making health insurance more expensive and even more complicated to understand than it already was . Buying health insurance online , whether it 's through the government marketplaces or private sites , is not like shopping around for the best deal on a hotel room or an airplane ticket . You will encounter a bizarre world of seemingly similar looking insurance products with wildly different prices or similarly priced products with wildly different benefit designs . I guide people through this maze and it really does n't matter if they have a 10th grade education or a PhD , they are amazed at the subtle differences I have to point out that make the real differences in the health insurance products they purchase . For example , one insurance carrier here in Tennessee offers identical insurance products in the government marketplace but has three different PPO network options attached to them . The average person would look at these products , determine that the benefits are the same and so why not pick the one with the lowest monthly premium ? What they have painfully learned later is that they have enrolled in a health plan with a very narrow network of doctors , hospitals and pharmacies . The hospital a few miles from their house that they assumed was in-network because it is part of the overall health system they have been familiar with in the past turns out not to be included in this narrow network product and instead they may have to go across town or to another county -LRB- in more rural areas -RRB- to go to an in-network hospital . Another major carrier uses terms like `` Local Preferred '' and `` National Preferred '' to differentiate their products . A quick scan of the benefit summaries reveals only slight differences in office visit & prescription copays , deductibles and out-of-pocket maximums but unless you really dig deep you wo n't be able to figure out one limits your pharmacy choices significantly while the other does not . Other insurance companies whose plans people have been familiar with and even enrolled in for years have found that these company 's products have transformed into products that now require primary care referrals for visits to specialists and other services or that they provide little or no coverage outside of their immediate geographic area . Just this week I spent about 3 hours explaining his different options to a man in his early 30 's who is smart enough to run his own business and who has been my customer for 6 years . The next morning he had his mother call me so I could explain the same things to her so she could help him feel good about his final decision . This is the reality of what the average consumer is now faced with in today 's health insurance marketplace . My advice , it 's a jungle out there . Do n't go in without a trained guide and beware of these so called `` navigators '' and `` assistants '' they are unlicensed , poorly trained -LRB- perhaps good intentioned -RRB- individuals who can do little more than read the same material on a computer that you can see .
You can laminate your Medicare card ; there is no ruling against doing so . The Social Security Administration advises against laminating your Social Security card because of security features built into the card . But the Medicare card does not have these features , so your Medicare card can be laminated . Some feel that it interferes with scanning , but there is usually no problem with scanning a laminated card .
The simple answer is yes , you will need to show proof of a CT issued car insurance policy in order to register your car . CT does n't particularly care about Comp and Collision coverage , but your finance company will . When you buy your CT insurance , you will receive an Identification Card that certifies that you are carying at least the minimum amount of Liability insurance that is required here , namely $ 20,000 per person , $ 40,000 per accident for Bodily Injury and $ 10,000 for property damage . As I said , this is the currentminimum requirement set by law . Talk to your insurance professional about other options that will protect you more fully .
Recording keeping can be a daunting task throughout a lifetime , but with new technology most statements can be scanned into your computer that uses a back up system . Scanning services may also be available in your community . Your adviser should also have statements and possibly your previous files before you engaged his or her services . some advisers recommend seven years , others three years .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
At What Age Does Medicare Start ?
For most people , Medicare starts the 1st day of the month you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part A & B which covers about 80 % of the costs of care . You can also sign up for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- to cover the difference . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . In addition , you can get a Medicare Part D plan to cover your prescription needs .
For most people , Medicare starts when you turn age 65 . It can start earlier if you are disabled under Social Security definitions and are receiving SSDI . It can also begin before age 65 if you have ALS -LRB- amyoptropic lateral sclerosis -RRB- or ESRD -LRB- end stage renal disease -RRB- . Your Medicare Part B can begin later if you are covered under a group health insurance plan .
At what age does life insurance go up ? Prior to purchase life insurance costs , no matter the product rise every age change . In the younger ages the difference is a few dollars . Starting around age 50 , the slope for cost increase starts to rise sharply . In your 60 's and above waiting can add thousands onto the cost of your insurance . By purchasing a policy , you can either lock the cost in for the life of the policy -LRB- permanent -RRB- or for a block of time -LRB- term -RRB- .
Time ! Okay , I 'll go deeper . :-RRB- Money , properly invested , grows and compounds over time . The sooner you begin the more you would have.If you start your working career at age 25 and worked until age 70 that is 45 years of working.Hypothetically , let 's say you began putting away just $ 200 a month at age 25 and stopped at age 45 and earned a 7 % actual return , if you did n't put in another penny and waited until age 70 you 'd have $ 565.5458.87 . That means you put in $ 48,000 of your money and allowed it to compound.If you waited until age 45 to start saving for retirement you would have to put in $ 698.04 per month for 25 years earning that 7 % actual return to end up with the same $ 565,458.87 . It would take $ 209,410.68 of your money to accumulate that much money.The sooner you start , even if it is n't that much money , put into the right places can really blossom into a tremendous amount of money.Hope this helps .
In one word ... Time ! Okay , I 'll go deeper . :-RRB- Money , properly invested , grows and compounds over time . The sooner you begin the more you would have . If you start your working career at age 25 and worked until age 70 that is 45 years of working . Hypothetically , let 's say you began putting away just $ 200 a month at age 25 and stopped at age 45 and earned a 7 % actual return , if you did n't put in another penny and waited until age 70 you 'd have $ 565.5458.87 . That means you put in $ 48,000 of your money and allowed it to compound . If you waited until age 45 to start saving for retirement you would have to put in $ 698.04 per month for 25 years earning that 7 % actual return to end up with the same $ 565,458.87 . It would take $ 209,410.68 of your money to accumulate that much money . The sooner you start , even if it is n't that much money , put into the right places can really blossom into a tremendous amount of money . Hope this helps .
If you receive Social Security benefits at age 65 , Medicare automatically starts at age 65 . Medicare will automatically enroll you in Part A and Part B . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits , you can start still start receiving Medicare Part A and B , or you can keep Part A and opt out of Part B until your group coverage ends .
Medicare usually starts at age 65 BUT there are exceptions . Those on disability at any age may qualify for Medicare . You can also delay the start of Medicare until a later age if you wish . it is becoming more common for those turning 65 to accept Part aA of medicare but delay Part B because they have a corporate health plan . Multiple variable which is why it is always good to meet with a professional to review your options .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies will set a commencement date far enough ahead into the future to show you an impressive number for your return , and that is the date by which you must have started taking your withdrawals . The truth is that you can take money out at any time , BUT - there are serious consequences if you are n't careful . An annuity is not a suitable product for someone who has cash flow issues , and might need the money sooner than later . I 'd advise you to look at your policy , and look for these things : Do I have a free withdrawal amount , if so , how much and when can I start taking it ? How long is the surrender period , and what are the charges ? -LRB- If the surrender period is ten years , that means every year during that period , whatever you withdraw will be subject to that fee , among likely others , as well as a federal penalty of 10 % if you are younger than 591/2 -RRB- The last thing to look at is what triggers if you pull money out . Does it start , or lock in a payment cycle for you ? Again , that could be disastrous if you are n't very careful . Let the money ride in there as long as you can afford to , -LRB- at least until you are 60 -RRB- and then start taking your withdrawals . Depending on how your annuity is structured , you may be required to start your rmd 's at the age of 701/2 . If you 'd like help with your specifics , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
The best time to buy long-term care insurance is anytime you are medically qualified to do so . The biggest problem people have is that they wait too long to apply , they get a condition or chronic health problem that is uninsurable by any carrier , and they are stuck with an LTC-friendly annuity as their only possible solution to how they might pay for long-term care costs . -LRB- This would be an annuity that does not require underwriting for the LTC benefit of the annuity contract , but allows for liberal access to the account value for payment of LTC costs . -RRB- Buying at a very young age does n't not have much of a financial advantage since premiums do n't really start to climb until about ages 50-60 . After age 65 , one has in reality `` missed the train '' and , assuming medical qualification , will pay a hefty price for a traditionally designed long-term care contract . However , there is another train behind the first one , and that involves designing the contract as a static pool of money with maximum access to it . It costs about half of thetraditionally designed LTCi contract , but it lacks any accommodation for the escalation of care costs over time . Still , it is better than no coverage at all . From an economic perspective , in buying young , one would have to weigh the cost of paying premium over a longer period of time . From an insurability perspective , however , one should remember that Superman -LRB- Christopher Reeve -RRB- did not know he would become a quadriplegic at age 41 . Also , many carriers have a `` preferred '' rate class , which may be a lot easier to get at an early application age . Recent claims history research has shown that a greater percentage of claimants are under age 65 and the number is growing . With some possible tax breaks on the payment of LTCi premiums - and possibly greater tax breaks in the future as Congress weighs the burden the uninsured elderly on Medicaid - one should seriously start planning for long-term care individually , as a couple , and for parents as early as possible . Death will happen . How long it takes to die may be problematic and costly .
The trick to this is getting quotes that are comparable.There are so many more nuances in Homeowners coverages than on auto . So start out with what coverages you have now . Start with the amount of insurance on Coverage A of your policy . Does this really reflect the replacement cost of your property ? Now look at the ancillary coverages : Do you have water/sewer back up ? Does the limit include both dwelling and contents or only one or the other . Do you have Law and Ordinance Coverage what is the percentage ? What about personal injury coverage ? Do you have a schedule or need specific coverage on jewelry , watches or furs or similar expensive items limited in the existing policy by a dollar value ? If so what is it ? Do you need special circumstantial coverage for a home based business , ? Do you have home Warranty Coverage ? Do you have Earthquake coverage ? Is it constrained by a per cent deductible ? If so what is it ? I think you will get the picture . then I would suggest you give an independent agency a call or visit their website . We would be glad to help you , but perhaps you are not in the Atlanta area and want some local contact . We understand that but our recommendation to an independent agent is still sound advice as they typically will have multiple companies to compare .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Thirty years certainly could be enough to save for retirement . The total amount you need to save in today 's dollars depends largely on what retirement success means to you . Once you have a basic idea , you can determine what is needed to fund your desired lifestyle . Deciding what you want to do 30 years from now is quite difficult so using the `` standard '' 70 % of current income is a good starting point . Once you are within 10-15 years , you should start fine tuning your retirement plan to get things aligned . NOTE : The rule of compound interest 72 interest rate = the number of years it takes for the funds to double . For example 72 10 % = 7.2 . That means at 10 % interest your money doubles every 7.2 years . Therefore , the earlier you start the better . More information on what you ought to know about protecting and growing your Nest Egg can be found at WEBSITELINK If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
As a practical matter , insurers usually price their products for issue ages up to age 79 . The premiums are pretty high at the oldest ages so it is generally wise to buy as early as possible so long term care insurance does not become cost prohibitive for your financial situation . Not only does it get costly the longer you wait to start , the chances that you will be uninsurable increase dramatically at older ages .
This answer will vary from one company to the next . But generally , drivers will start to see small gradual increases in their rate after they reach age 70 . After they reach the age of 80 , rates start to increase at a sharper rate . By age 85 , older drivers start to surpass teen drivers for the highest rate . But again , these answers all vary from one company to the next .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Much Should I Be Paying For Disability Insurance ?
If you are paying for a personal individual disability policy you want to pay for it from your personal checking account . The reason is with today 's tax laws it will not be tax deductible or a business expense unless you are paying for employees . The good news is since you pay premiums with after tax dollars , if you become disable , your benefits are drawn tax free to you .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
In order to figure out how much Disability Insurance you should have , you need to understand that Disability Insurance is based on your current income . Depending on how much you make , you may qualify for up to 70 % of your gross income . This said , you need to understand what your need may be , how much you can afford within your budget and design the policy to cover any partial disability . Without knowing your specific situation , I would start with the maximum benefit , and go from there . If you need help looking at some quotes , do not hesitate to contact me or your local insurance broker . Thank you for the question .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I usually use the acronym DIMEE as a place to start . D = Debt or short term debt . This would be paying off credit cards , car loans , or any consumer debt . I = Income or Income Replacement . You should deceide how much for how long . A good place to start is 3 to 5 years of replacing an income . You might consider longer if cost is not much different . M = Mortgage = Paying off Mortgage . You should consider paying off the Mortgage if the income earner dies . E = Education = An estimation of your children 's tuition for a good state university if you die . You should consider 4 years of costs per child E = Expense for funeral/burial : You should cover the costs of burial or cremation , funeral services , and transportation of loved ones . These are a great place to start the discussion of what amount of Life Insurance that you need .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
There is no set guideline to how much you should pay for Term Life Insurance . There are general guidelines . E.g. . If you take a 10 year term policy , you should pay less than you would pay for a 30 year term policy . If the rates are similar you are much better off locking that rate in for 30 years . Another general guideline would be , if you can get a permanent policy for a price just slightly higher than term , take the permanent policy . Sometimes Universal Life rates run close to Term rates at older ages , especially if the UL rates are locked in to age 90 or 95 . Universal Life is much more flexible than Term , so if you can get it for a similar price , go for it . Aside from generalities , no one can predict how much you should pay for a term life insurance policy because life insurance rates are based on your age , sex , tobacco status , and health . You can check out an instant quote engine on internet websites to get an idea of what term rates might run for you . But you need to call the agency to get a more accurate rate .
When buying Disability insurance you need to consider how many years you want it to last , how many months you want to wait from incurring the disability until you receive the first payment -LRB- elimination period -RRB- , and how much of your income you want to replace . You need to consider features like whether it will pay if you are able to go back to work but not are not back up to your old wages -LRB- residual disability -RRB- , whether it will pay if you can not perform your own occupation , and whether it has a cost of living rider . Finally , you need to consider your budget and how much of the above you can afford , then pick out the features that are most important to you .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Dog Attacks ?
It is best to discuss this with your Insurance Professional in order to completely understand the terms , conditions and limitations of your policy . Some companies may limit or exclude the amount of coverage available for such liability claims . Others may approve or disapprove Homeowners coverage depending upon the breed of the dog you may have .
If you are walking down the street and a pack of dogs attacks you , your homeowners insurance will not cover it . This would be a claim on your medical insurance . However , if you own a dog and your dog attacks someone not a member of your household , your homeowners liability coverage may cover the resultant medical and legal expenses . `` May '' is the operative word as some homeowners insurance companies exclude dog bite liability for all or some breeds . And even if yours does not exclude , they most certainly will following filing the 1st dog bite claim under the philosophy of where there 's smoke , there 's fire . One incident is a good indicator that another is likely . Talk to your insurance professional for your specific coverage or lack thereof !
Renters Insurance in the US is an outgrowth of the regular Homeowners Insurance policies that have been in use in many states since the mid 20th Century . In fact for many companies the forms in use continue to be variations -LRB- with appropriate state approvals -RRB- of forms developed by the Insurance Service Office , ISO . The Insurance Service Office is not alone in developing contractual homeowners and subsequently renters policy forms in use in the various states . There are other product development groups and larger companies often develop their own product offerings . With all that said , there are some common elements to homeowner and renters policy and by far the use of annual -LRB- 12 month terms predominates -RRB- . Decades ago there were companies using forms that lasted as much as three years for homeowners , but the reality of getting appropriate approvals from the regulators , responding to loss results and getting mortgage companies to accept the policies has all led to a fairly standardized approach in the US that homeowners and renters policies are primarily annual contracts . But do n't throw away all your old policies when you get to the end of a year if you are all aware of an event that might give rise to coverage during that time period . For example suppose during the term of your renters policy your dog bit a neighbor . That occurrence then would be associated with the payment of loss for the infliction of bodily injury even though the damage is only assessed completely for years to come . Her is why I mention dog bites . In many states you have absolute liability for your dog 's aggression . And , dogs who maul a victim are often attacking children -LRB- easier prey to the dog -RRB- and the damages are usually to the child 's head . Therefore as they age there can be a need for repeated surgeries to address the scaring . Since the renters policy is typically an occurrence policy , the policy which will respond is not the current insurer several years out , but the insurer at the time of the event or '' occurrence ''
This really depend on the size , breed , and prior history of the dog biting someone . This has become a huge issue in many states . You may encounter significant difficulty is insuring your home with a standard homeowners policy which includes liability coverage if there is history of biting or the dog is of a bred that has had a greater propensity to have been involved in attacks such as a pit bull . There is enough concern about this primarily because dog bites are often the second most likely cause of loss in many states for an individual carrier . Some carriers limit the liability coverage and some simply charge more if they perceive a more significant risk of loss . Dog owners should be aware that an absolute liability can exist in some states just by owning the dog.In other words the fact that you own the dog is sufficient to cause of liability for you and your carrier .
If your asking does renters insurance cover your dog biting or attacking someone the answer would be yes unless there is a dog exclusion on your policy . Also there are certain dogs an insurance company will not take if you own when you started the policy . If you did not disclose your breed of dog this could be seen as misrepresentation and the claim may not be paid .
Most companies have a prohibited dog list . If you have one of these dogs listed below most home insurance companies will either not write the policy or issue a notice of non-renewal if discovered . If you have an animal liability endorsement , the coverage more than likely will not cover any prohibitive dog claim . Animal liability or `` dog bite '' liability will cover your dog that is not on any prohibitive list and has no bite history . Take a look at the list from one of the companies we represent . Akitas American Bulldogs Beaucerons Caucasian Mountain Dogs Chow Chow Doberman Pinschers German Shephards Great Danes Pit Bulls Rottweilers Staffordshire Terriers Wolf Hybrids This not a general list for all homeowners insurance companies . Each company may have their own list of prohibitive dog breeds . If you own a dog , it is best you first check your policy to determine if your homeowners policy covers any animal liability claim and if so , what is the sublimit of liability ?
Dog bites would be covered under the liability portion of your homeowners policy . Dog bites have become a big deal over the last several years and dog bite can be a very expensive loss in some cases . For this reason many insurance companies have put exclusions on certain breeds of dogs and will not cover a dog bite . You would need to check with your specific insurance company to see if your breed of dog is covered should a dog bit occur . All agents should be having this discussion with the client before purchasing a policy .
Depends on several factors including the State involved , the relative underwriting policies of the various carriers and the breed of dog . Since there are more than 4.5 million dog bites each year in the U.S. with more than 50 % of them occurring on the dog owners ' premises , it is easy to see why this can be a huge issue with regard to dog ownership and homeowner insurance coverage . The liability coverage supplied in homeowners and renters policies is at risk depending on these factors . In most States , it depends on the breed of dog . Be upfront with a prospective or existing insurance carrier . Some carriers will increase your rates if you are an existing customer and others may refuse you as a customer . Others may be precluded from doing so , based on State regulations . Your agent can help you with this process and should be able to tell you the position of each carrier with regard to your specific breed of dog .
A dog bite should be covered under a homeowners insurance policy under the liability portion of the policy as long as . 1 -RRB- There is no dog exclusion on the policy 2 -RRB- You do not have what your particular insurance carrier would classify as a vicious dog at the time you purchased the policy . 3 -RRB- Vicious dogs are not excluded Since a dog bite is very serious and falls under liability I highly suggest you consult your agent if in fact you have a dog bite situation
The answer is typically yes , but there are some Caveats > The typical renters policy is based on the ISO , Insurance Service Office developed HO 4 policy . So in effect a renters policy is more or less a homeowners policy without the house . Renters policies typically have a Section Two Liability Coverage which you review as to the limit of coverage and if there any significant restriction . Since dog bites are increasingly a major frequency issue for insurers , some have taken the position of carving out a restriction of coverage if certain dogs , dog breeds or size does not meet their standards . In Canada their are some Provinces have determined certain breeds to be against public policy and while they have not gone to putting down any dog of those breeds , but have taken the position that no new dog of certain breeds can be housed in that Province .
There are three levels to consider . If there is a dog with a history of biting , regardless of breed , that dog is probably excluded from coverage . If there are dogs at the residence that are pit bulls , wolf mixes , Doberman Pinchers , and Chows they are probably excluded . All other dogs have limited coverage . That means that in the case of a dog bite the normal limits of the policy do not apply . Check the back of your homeowners policy to see if there is an endorsement about pets or dogs .
There are two elements of coverage provided by physical damage . The collision element will pay for damage to you vehicle involving an accident with any object that a normal human being can not pick up and move , except Superman , Hulk and Iron Man -LRB- if he has fuel -RRB- -RRB- : A strong farmer , like my grandpa , could move a dead deer , dog , cow , horse or bird so therefor he would collect under the fist element of coverage call comprenshive . comphrensive is the really good stuff for it has been broadened to cover almost any risk of loss except collision with objects . Comp , as we in the profession call it , provides all risk -LRB- any type of loss -RRB- except war and maybe nuclear attack ... oh do n't forget the felony exclusion thingy , it will bite you in the butt .
In New York , one of the standard exclusions under the property coverages is something along the lines of ` animals , birds , and fish . ' If youown a valuable dog , a ` canine mortality ' policy would be appropriate to insure the value of the animal . There are also health insurance policies available for dogs . If you meant to ask ` Are dog bites/attacks and/or damage done by my dog covered underthe personal liabilityy section of a renters policy ? ' , the answer depends on a reading of your policy . Many carriers have a ` dog exclusion ' endorsement which voids liability for either all owned dogs or specific breeds . A competent agent or broker should -LRB- as a standard procedure -RRB- assess/survey your hazards and include questions to you about owned animals -LRB- especially dogs -RRB- as many carriers will not accept as new risks those individuals owning certain breeds of dogs . Always determine prior to purchase that the insurance policy you wish to purchase provides coverage for your exposures ; if the policy covers the liability exposure of the animals you own . If the policy application contains questions about animals , make sure they are answered completely and truthfully , you sign the application , and you retain a copy of the application -LRB- or anything else you sign - always and without fail -RRB- . If you can not obtain a copy , do not complete the transaction .
Usually ownership of a pet does not affect the premium for a homeowners policy . Ownership of a dangerous dog or breed of dog is likely to stop a company from issuing any coverage at any price . Many companies have added an amendment to the policy that severely restricts coverage in the event of an incident involving a dog of certain breeds or a dog with a history of aggressive behavior .
Yes , most people who have had a heart attack and get life insurance . If you were under age 40 when you had your heart attack , you may need to settle for guaranteed issue or simplified issue life insurance . If your heart attack was at an older age , your heart function is still good , you have addressed any issues that led to the heart attack -LRB- CAD , diet , etc -RRB- , and several years have passed since having the heart attack , you should be able to get a medically underwritten policy . If you have just suffered your heart attack , your choices will be limited to graded policies for a few years . But you can get life insurance in most states .
Yes , it can . It depends on the breed of dog that you have . Almost all insurance carriers have some restrictions on the dog breeds that they are willing to accept as part of a homeowners risk . If the dog has ever bitten or scratched someone that may also affect whether or not the carrier is willing to accept your homeas a risk with the dogs history . Please contact your local to find out if your carrier has any restrictions on dog breeds and what they may be .
Yes , most people can get life insurance after a heart attack . The type , quantity , and price of the life insurance that one can get after a heart attack depends on a number of variables . These include : The age at which the heart attack occurred -LRB- the older , the better , for life insurance purposes -RRB- . The severity of the heart attack . What treatment followed -LRB- bypass ? stent ? etc -RRB- . Whether the treatment was successful and there was not recurrence for several years . If healthy life habits were pursued -LRB- e.g. quit smoking , exercise regularly , etc -RRB- . Number of cardiac events . Ejection fraction of heart , stress test results , and other cardiac tests . If unable to get a medically underwritten policy , there are some simplified issue policies that simply ask if a heart attack has occurred in the past # of years . Your agent getting a full health history and being able to shop multiple carriers will ensure that you get the best life insurance rate post heart attack .
Dog bite is a terrible problem . It is covered by your homeowners policy , however , insurance companies have added pages to the policy that restrict and remove that coverage . Many insurance companies will not write a homeowners policy if they know that specific breeds are present . If a policy is written it will specifically exclude any coverage for any animal of those breeds and for any dog with a history of biting . Additionally , they will frequently reduce the liability coverage for a dog bite .
You should be able to get life insurance after a heart attack , but it can take a while until you are able to be approved for life insurance . Most nonmed policies require a waiting period of at least one year after a heart attack . Medically underwritten policies can be more lenient , or much stricter . That is because they look at the total picture : smoking status , weight , complicating health conditions such as diabetes , etc. . If the heart attack was an isolated incident and steps have been taken to prevent another one , one may be able to get life insurance shortly after suffering a heart attack . If the whole health picture is unfavorable , the person who had the heart attack may need to take guaranteed issued life insurance . Normally , the case is middle ground , so finding a life insurance agent that specializes in heart disease can be very helpful .
Your car insurance does cover hitting a dog . It is possible that you will have physical damage to your vehicle , especially the bumper or whatever part of the car strikes the dog . There may be other expenses involved with the accident that could be covered . If the dog was `` at fault , '' and simply ran in front of you car , your insurer will certainly talk to the owners of the dog to discuss the situation .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can I Claim X Rays On Medicare ?
X-rays , CT scans , MRI and most diagnostic imaging tests are a covered item under Medicare Part B -LRB- and sometimes A -RRB- . Your doctor must have evaluated you personally and ordered the test as part of his or her diagnostic procedure . The imaging facility , clinic or doctors office will bill Medicare directly .
Yes , X rays can be claimed on Medicare when they are determined as medically necessary -LRB- ordered by a doctor -RRB- . Medicare Part A covers X rays provided in a hospital or skilled nursing facility , and Medicare Part B covers X rays ordered on an outpatient basis . Medicare does not cover X rays ordered for preventative screening .
Medicare Part B normally covers X-rays that are considered medically necessary . Dental X-rays , unless performed due to injury to the mouth , are generally not a covered expense . If you need X-rays while admitted to the hospital as an inpatient your X-rays should be covered under Medicare Part A . If the radiologist is not on staff their charges may fall under Part B .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
Diagnostic X-rays can be billed under Medicare Part A as part of your hospital stay , or under Medicare Part B as an outpatient procedure . Your medical provider will know how to code and bill the procedure to Medicare . If you have a Medicare supplement plan , Medicare will forward the adjudicated claim on to your Medigap carrier as part of crossover and your supplement plan will pay their portion .
X-rays are usually covered under Medicare Part B. Medicare Part B has an annual deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- that must be satisfied before Medicare pays for outpatient charges . After the deductible is satisfied , Medicare pays 80 % of the approved amount and you are responsible for the balance . Most people buy a Medicare supplement plan to cover some or all of the expenses approved by Medicare but not paid due to deductibles and coinsurance .
An x-ray is covered under Medicare Part B. Medicare will pay for 80 % of the Medicare-approved amount for the expense after the Part B deductible is met -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- - you would be responsible for the other 20 % and the Part B deductible . When you first enroll in Medicare Part B , you open your 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! . A Medigap plan can cover the deductibles and a portion or all of the other 20 % of expenses covered by Part B and features a number of other big advantages as well . An experienced broker can help find the plan that 's most suitable for you and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of help . Thanks very much .
Chiropractors may order x-rays for patients who are on Medicare , but you would be responsible for 100 % of the expenses . Medicare can help pay for certain services provided by a chiropractor -LRB- such as when they 're trying to correct a subluxation in the spine -RRB- . Medicare would cover 80 % and you would pay the other 20 % after the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . I would recommend contacting Medicare to see what specific services would be covered that are provided by a chiropractor .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have cancer ? Well , it depends upon a lot of questions . The type of cancer diagnosed , the date first diagnosis occurred . I need to know was it treated by surgery , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , hormonal therapy . I 'll also need to know , enlist the stage of the cancer , as well as the grade of the cancer . I need to know also , has it spread to other parts of the body , because that 's going to be issue for us to be able to underwrite . And then the last one is has there been proper follow ups to your cancer ? Which is CT scans , X-rays , bone scans , laboratory work . I need to know those kinds of things to accumulate enough information to give you the proper offer . Remember , certain carriers are more benevolent in certain types of cancers than others .
Medicare Part B covers 80 % of diagnostic X-ray and labs that are ordered by a physician as part of an outpatient setting . If you are an inpatient , these are covered under your Medicare Part A hospitalization bill . There are ways to reduce the 20 % you would owe under Part B. Speak to your local agent to determine whether a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medicare Supplement makes the most sense for your situation .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B , but why would you want to ? Medicare Part B is for more than just doctor visits . Part B also covers outpatient diagnostic testing , labs , X-ray , CT scans , MRI , Emergency Room , ambulance and much more . Chemotherapy is also a covered Medicare Part B expense .
Yes , Medicare will pay for Synvisc-One injections if for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee . The osteoarthritis must be verified by X-Ray and of course , the one giving the injection must be Medicare approved . It can only be given once every 6 months and only osteoarthritis of the knee is approved by Medicare for Synvisc , which is a hyalauronan drug .
Medicare will pay for Euflexxa injections for the knee only . As with all treatments , it must be determined to be medically necessary to be covered by Medicare . Evidence of osteoarthritis of the knee is required by X-ray in order for Medicare to cover hyaluronan injections , of which Euflexxa is one .
Medicare Part B covers your doctors and outpatient services such as blood tests , X-Rays , MRI 's . and other outpatient testing . Part B also covers Durable Medical Equipment such as walkers , emergency service , flu shots , diabetic foot exams , Glaucoma testing , home health services -LRB- limited -RRB- , dialysis , and certain types of drugs in addition to an annual wellness exam . For a comprehensive answer see Medicare & You 2013 edition or go to Medicare.gov . You can also speak with a good agent specializing in Medicare and the needs of older adults .
Most major medical health insurance policies will cover CAT -LRB- CT -RRB- scans , as well as PET , MRI and X-rays ... all of which are diagnostic tests . Because CT scans can be quite expensive , if the carrier decides the scan was not the most cost effective method of diagnosing a condition , the claim may be denied .
Medicare has a set fee schedule for every procedure , including diagnostic testing , X-ray , CT , MRI and so forth . If you use a medical provider that accepts assignment they can not balance bill you and your out of pocket for medically necessary testing will be limited to your Medicare deductibles and coinsurance .
Medicare Part B covers diagnostic tests , including x-rays , when your doctor has determined it is needed to help diagnose a medical problem . Part B will pay about 80 % of the expenses - you 'll be responsible for paying the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can cover the 20 % of expenses you would otherwise be responsible for .
Routine dental checkups , cleanings , dental x-rays , crowns , etc. are not covered under original Medicare -LRB- parts A & B -RRB- . You would need to buy a separate dental insurance plan to cover these benefits . If you have a medically necessary procedure completed in a hospital such as the repair of a broken jaw , then Medicare would cover it because it was an emergency situation . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B covers virtually all outpatient expenses including doctor visits , X-ray , MRI , CT , outpatient surgery , ER , ambulance and lab work . Part B has an annual deductible of $ 147 -LRB- for 2013 -RRB- and then Medicare pays 80 % of approved charges , you pay the remaining balance . If you have a Medigap plan your liability may be $ 0 if you have plan F
X-rays , CT scans , MRI and most diagnostic imaging tests are a covered item under Medicare Part B -LRB- and sometimes A -RRB- . Your doctor must have evaluated you personally and ordered the test as part of his or her diagnostic procedure . The imaging facility , clinic or doctors office will bill Medicare directly .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does A Life Insurance Wholesaler Make ?
A wholesaler with good work ethic andorganizationalskills with a large life insurance company in the brokerage market should be making $ 120,000 - $ 150,000 minimum with the potential to make upwards of $ 250,000 .
A life insurance wholesaler is an agency that recruits life insurance agents to sell the products of various life insurance companies . For instance , if you meet with an agent and he shows you rate comparisons of 25 different companies and you choose to apply with one , the agent does n't need to deal directly with all 25 companies . He will deal with the wholesaler and can offer you the products of all the companies . You get the lowest rate any of the companies offer . Life insurance companies are required by law to give you the same rate no matter how you apply .
The allowed amount is the predetermined price that the health insurance company will pay for specific procedures performed by in-network providers . Think of it as wholesale versus retail prices . In-network providers charge the insurance company the allowed -LRB- wholesale -RRB- amount . In exchange , the providers get a flow of business from plan participants . Out-of-network providers did not agree to the wholesale prices , and do not benefit from the flow of patients participating in a particular plan . They often charge a retail rate when treating out-of-network patients . The patient often owes the difference between the allowed amount , and what the provider charges .
A wholesaler with good work ethic andorganizationalskills with a large life insurance company in the brokerage market should be making $ 120,000 - $ 150,000 minimum with the potential to make upwards of $ 250,000 .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
You should always purchase your life insurance from an independent life agent or life licensed , registered representative , who access wholesale brokerage shops with a huge inventory of life insurance companies . Be advised that proprietary career agents may offer their product line without shopping the inventory of life insurance available through brokerage .
I have given a lot of thought to this question . As you know , I sell life insurance professionally . It is a very competitive marketplace , and consumers have many options . You can go to independent brokers . You can go to captive agents . You can go to P&C brokers , group benefits consultants , financial planners . You can go to bankers , accountants , stockbrokers , and virtually every other financial professional who cross-sells . You can go on-line . You can go to some companies directly . I have staked my ground as a self-employed , independent , life insurance specialist . I think this model equips me to give not just good service , but outstanding service to my clients . I will tell you why . You can not be a jack of all trades and master of none . Life insurance is not an add - on commodity . It happens to be the most complex and extensively underwritten financial product in the marketplace . In some cases , you can go through more hoops buying life insurance than if you were buying a business . A life insurance broker needs to be a master of the underwriting process . He has to guide people through those hoops to get the most desirable results . Therefore he has to specialize in this product , and this product only . Financial representatives who have become expert in another niche simply can not master a second one . How many master builders out there are also master electricians and master plumbers ? The broker also has to be independent . Its not just a question of having access to multiple companies because different companies will be competitive for different insurance . Its also a question of having access to different distributors . Different general agents will have leverage with different underwriters in different companies . You cant just affiliate with one wholesaler and expect them to get the job done right for everyone of your clients . You need to spread your business around . Treating your sales practice like a business is also key . You are not just a salesman , and you are not just an expert . You are a businessman who can not survive without clients . You do not get paid until they are happy with the policy they bought . You need to have an attitude of keeping the customer satisfied . And that starts with making integrity the core of your business model . Every quote given should be both competitive and reliable . People should know what theyre getting before they sign on the dotted line . They should expect to get approved at the rate quoted . This is a normal expectation every consumer has . Whether you aree buying a toaster , a car , or an entire corporation , the product must be delivered at the agreed-upon price . This means that the life insurance salesman must make a commitment and an investment in every client taken on . He will have to negotiate and advocate on behalf of the client to make sure that all parties involved in the prequalification and underwriting processes perform with integrity . This way you as the consumer will be a happy camper when you do business with that broker . And that is the bottom line .
There are many , many companies that offer disability insurance . Just to name a few ... Standard Insurance , Principal Financial Group , Mutual of Omaha , Lloyds of London , Ameritas , Assurity , and Mass Mutual . If possible , purchase disability insurance through an agent who uses a wholesale distributor . That way , your agent can provide you with quotes from multiple companies , rather than just one .
Doctors are n't leaving Medicare on a wholesale basis , but most still limit the number of new Medicare patients they are willing to treat . When you do the same work for 20 - 30 % less than what you would be paid by a private insurance plan , can you see any reason for treating Medicare patients ?
The company looks at the cost of repair and compares it to the wholesale value of the car to determine whether or not to total the car in the event of an accident . Each company may have adifferentevaluation in this regard but as a general rule of thumb , that is what they will look at .
If you 're unable to find a broker in your area , or if you 're just not sure to start , you can visit a disability insurance wholesaler , such as Disability Insurance Services , and they can put you in contact with a trusted broker in your area . That way , you know the agent your working with has extensive DI experience , and is already contracted with numerous carriers , thus being able to provide you with numerous quotes .
You can receive disability insurance by finding a Life agent in your area or online . It 's nice to have someone in your area that you know so that they can be around to help should you ever need to file a claim . They 'll be able to shop around for you and find quotes from multiple carriers . Be sure you ask to see multiple offers and have your agent explain the different provisions on the policy . Sometimes the bells and whistles seen great , but depending on your occupation , they might be unnecessary . If you have a specific insurance company in mind , they can usually refer you to an agent who is already appointed with their company . You can also look for an disability insurance wholesaler who can put you in contact with an agent in your area that they already know and trust .
Premium taxes are generally never seen on a policy declaration page unless the carrier is a `` surplus lines '' insurance company.Surplus lines coverage is provided by a special agency type referred to as a `` surplus lines agent '' who acts as a wholesaler to retail agencies . The help non-admitted carriers manage their underwriting and administrative issues for the states where they except risk . The surplus lines agent deals with carriers who are not admitted to do business in a given state but they can also work with admitted carriers . The term `` admitted '' refers to the licensing process and a `` non-admitted '' carrier has not sought the approval of the state insurance department to provide insurance to residents and businesses of the state . When coverage is written by the non-admitted carrier , a tax is charged on the premium and fees charged by the surplus lines agency . That tax rate is 5 % in Ohio . The surplus lines agent then remits the tax to the state where the risk is located . That is a part of their services . And , in answering the final part of your question , usually surplus lines tax applies to business risk but can also apply to personal lines . By the way , a non-admitted carrier is not included in the protections of the carrier insolvency protections of state statute so this is important to keep in mind when doing business with non-admitted carriers . Not being an `` admitted '' carrier in a state is not an indication of the solvency of the carrier or its ability to pay claims but it is important to mention that the protections of the law in your state may not help if a non-admitted carrier goes bankrupt in the same way as you have protection -LRB- in many instances -RRB- when an admitted carrier goes bankrup .
I am so glad you asked this question . Life insurance is an underwriting-driven sale . A well-managed underwriting process will yield both good pricing and good service . This is what you need to keep the client satisfied . The underwriter has the final word . At the same time , the client , the broker , the general agent , the case manager and the underwriter all collaborate in making things happen . In addition , third-parties such as physicians offices , and advisers such as accountants and attorneys and bankers , all have a role to play . Let me give you some examples of how things could work the right way , and also the wrong way . The right way can get you an approval in a matter of weeks . The wrong way can drag it out to months and months and months . First of all , you as the client must go through full disclosure . Answer every question thoroughly and accurately . Make sure you get prequalified so that any underwriting challenges are addressed before you submit a formal application . You might have to clarify elements of your medical history . You might have to give details on risky activities such as mountain climbing a scuba diving . Amendments to physician records may be needed . If all this information is collected up front , then you can benefit in two ways . First of all you can be confident that you have both competitive and reliable quotes . Your application should be approved at the rate quoted . In addition , the underwriting process should run more smoothly because a number of underwriting requirements have already been obtained . If you dont get prequalified , and underwriting challenges are not addressed before hand , then all the time needed to do so will delay the formal underwriting process . It is also important to get the insurance exam completed quickly . Those lab and test results are essential to evaluating the level of risk you present . It may be that your blood chemistry is off the day you take the exam , and that might raise some questions . You might even have to repeat the exam . Or clarification may be needed from your doctor . Better to take care of these items sooner rather than later . The longer you wait in scheduling that exam , the longer the evaluation will take , and the longer it will take to remedy any emerging issues . Medical records are also a dealmaker or a dealbreaker . They too play a huge role in assessing risk . These days many physician offices are short-staffed and overloaded with bureaucratic insurance company and government requirements . They often contract with services to make copies of records . Their turnover of requests for copies of files is often slow . Bear in mind that they are paid in advance and well paid for this service . You as the patient may have to get involved to stress the importance of a faster turnaround . Many times , statements and documents from professional advisors are needed . In one case I have , I obtained a medical approval of great pricing over six months ago . However , copies of trust and buy sell agreement documents are required to get the final approval , and to issue the policies . The attorneys and accountants still havent delivered . General agents play a key role in delivering customer satisfaction . Brokers typically do not deal directly with underwriters - we deal with general agents who operate at the wholesale level . A general agent who has strong leverage with carriers will be able to deliver underwriting concessions . He or she will also be able to intervene as needed and advocate on behalf of the client and broker if snags pop up during underwriting . Things can happen . Sometimes one underwriter will prequalify a case , and another will formally underwrite it . These two may not agree on what the price should be . The general agent needs to stay on top of this and get the dispute resolved as quickly as possible . Case managers are also key . These are personnel inside general agencies who expedite requirements . If they are really on the ball , then the broker is notified promptly of the need for outstanding records , documents , client information , etc. . If they are slack , then requirements are filled too slowly . I think too many agencies just rely on software to give updates . This technology is useful ; at the same time , managers really do need to stay involved personally with cases and move them along . It takes the personal touch . In essence , with the right team approach and cooperation from all involved , then things can happen relatively quickly . The broker needs to treat underwriting as such and provide proper direction . Without this leadership , there is so much room for error that underwriting can become a nightmare .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Care Insurance Benefits Taxable ?
Payments of long-term care claims by an insurance company are generally not taxable as regular income . However , the policy title page must clearly state that the policy is a `` tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy '' or `` TQ '' . Some carriers still sell `` non-tax-qualified '' long-term care policies -LRB- NTQ -RRB- in which the benefits may be taxable as regular income . The reasoning is that NTQ policies are more generous in qualifying someone to go on claim and that other policy features may provide a broader range of care . Whether those attributes would offset the possible taxation of the benefit is debatable . Most long-term care policies today are `` TQ '' .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Payments of long-term care claims by an insurance company are generally not taxable as regular income . However , the policy title page must clearly state that the policy is a `` tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy '' or `` TQ '' . Some carriers still sell `` non-tax-qualified '' long-term care policies -LRB- NTQ -RRB- in which the benefits may be taxable as regular income . The reasoning is that NTQ policies are more generous in qualifying someone to go on claim and that other policy features may provide a broader range of care . Whether those attributes would offset the possible taxation of the benefit is debatable . Most long-term care policies today are `` TQ '' .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
In general , yes , the life insurance death benefit is income tax-free -LRB- IRC Section 101 -LRB- a -RRB- -RRB- . But , there are situations where this benefit may be lost . If too much premium is paid into the policy in violation of Section 7702 of the IRC , the policy is no longer considered life insurance , and the death benefit is income taxable . Insurance companies monitor this and usually take action to prevent such violations . Insurance professionals worry more about the following more common situations where the death benefit can be taxable since the burden is on the policy owner to monitor and violations are usually not caught before it is too late . 1 . Since 2006 , new rules apply to life insurance in a business context which subjects the life insurance death benefit to income tax . If the policy does not meet the special requirements of Section 101 -LRB- j -RRB- such as the notice and consent or protected class requirementsthe death benefit may be income taxable . There is also an annual IRS reporting requirement -LRB- Form 8925 -RRB- . We find most small business owners are not aware , especially of the latter requirement . Most tax professionals are usually not aware either . This is a common and growing problem which generally can not be corrected -LRB- except to cancel policies and start over -RRB- . 2 . Three parties to a policy -LRB- aka Goodman triangle -RRB- : If a third-party owner names a different third-party beneficiary of a life contract , the proceeds may be income taxable or gift taxable . 3 . If the policy falls within the transfer-for-value rule and does not qualify for a safe-harbor exception , its death benefit is income taxable . Business owners should meet with a life insurance professional who can perform a comprehensive policy review and can coordinate with your tax and legal advisors . These comments are for planning purposes only and are not tax or legal advice .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
Disability insurance you purchase without the financial contribution of your employer towards the premium expense of individual disability insurance will generally be free of income taxation . This tax treatment results from the circumstances . First , the money used to pay premiums are `` after-tax '' dollars . In other words , you already paid tax on the money used to pay the disability premiums when it was earned as income . Second , neither an employer or business will take a deduction on their tax returns for the payments made to provide the insurance to you . These two things make the income earned under a personal , individual disability policy free of income tax on the benefits . As a general rule , if a business pays for the a portion of the premium the benefit is probably taxable to some extent even when you contribute . The amount of the benefit that is taxable will be determined by the ratio of the total premium paid , compared against the premium amounts paid by the business and the individual . If the benefit is payable to a business the income is probably taxable . Corporate -LRB- or business -RRB- owned disability insurance can be designed to provide income or overhead expense protection . Overhead expense protection permits the deduction of cost on tax forms but the income is taxable . There is also the possibility that disability income coverage is used in a buy-sell agreement . When the benefit is paid to a business , as a general rule , the benefit is taxable . As in most instances , this general answer can not begin to address the variety of complicating circumstances so specific answers are best for specific situations .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Tax-qualified long-term care insurance -LRB- TQ -RRB- pays out a benefit to qualifying insureds that is not taxable as ordinary income . Virtually all long-term care insurance policies sold today are TQ . But , some carriers still sell policies that are non-tax qualified -LRB- NTQ -RRB- because such a policy does not come under the same regulation as a TQ policy . The argument by some is that with an NTQ policy it is easier for the insured to qualify for the payment of long-term care costs . The language of the NTQ policy may also be more generous with regard to benefits , features , and riders . Whether those factors would be worth the possible taxation of the benefits is debatable .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The cost of long term care exceeds the expectation of most people . Long term care can easily erode a substantial amount of money . Because traditional life insurance doesnt address the cost of long term care , these policies are important . The cost for long term care is increasing every year . Companies that once offered Long Term Care have withdrawn from the market . In response some life insurance companies are offering limited living benefits which would act like Long Term Care insurance by paying out part of the death benefit before death occurs .
In Canada , it is usually recommended that employees pay for their own group disability insurance . The reason is that if the employer pays for that portion of the group premium then the benefit -LRB- disability income -RRB- is taxable to the employee . The usual scenario has the employer and employee each paying 50 % of the total group premium . Under certain circumstances . it possible to structure individual policies where the company pays for the entire premium and deducts it as an expense . In this case the benefit -LRB- disability income -RRB- is taxable to the employee should he/she become disabled . The amount of income they could qualify for is increased to recognize the income would be taxable . The payment of the premium is not considered to be taxable benefit since the disability income is taxable . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does Mortgage Life Insurance Cost ?
Mortgage Life Insurance sold by most life insurance agencies is simply Term life insurance . The face amount does not decrease , so that if you pass away 20 years into the policy and 3/4 of your mortgage is paid off , your beneficiary can keep that 75 % of the death benefit to use for other purposes . The prices are very reasonable because this type of policy is sold everywhere and there is lots of competition . To find the cost of this mortgage life insurance , go to an online life insurance agency advertising `` instant quotes '' and run quotes to your heart 's content .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
I usually use the acronym DIMEE as a place to start . D = Debt or short term debt . This would be paying off credit cards , car loans , or any consumer debt . I = Income or Income Replacement . You should deceide how much for how long . A good place to start is 3 to 5 years of replacing an income . You might consider longer if cost is not much different . M = Mortgage = Paying off Mortgage . You should consider paying off the Mortgage if the income earner dies . E = Education = An estimation of your children 's tuition for a good state university if you die . You should consider 4 years of costs per child E = Expense for funeral/burial : You should cover the costs of burial or cremation , funeral services , and transportation of loved ones . These are a great place to start the discussion of what amount of Life Insurance that you need .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Generally Bank owned life insurance is designed to protect the bank if you take out a loan . I usually recommend buying your own policy . It gives your beneficiary more options . For example , mortgage insurance is usually offered by a bank . It can also be purchased on your own . Both would pay off the mortgage if you die . With the bank owned policy , that is the only choice . What if your spouse does n't want or need to pay off the mortgage however . This is not always the best option . If you own the policy , your wife or beneficiary may choose to invest the life insurance funds and use the interest to help make mortgage payments . Or the money would be more advantageous elsewhere . Mortgage life insurance with the bank is tied to that mortgage . What if you move ? Owning your own policy is portable , you can take it with you to your new home . I usually recommend level term to cover a mortgage . That way you have extra protection as your mortgage decreases because the death benefit will stay level . With a banks mortgage life insurance it just pays off the mortgage to the bank on that loan . Yes it works , but you are better off with your own policy .
Mortgage life insurance works very similar to a traditional life insurance policy - in short , a premium is paid to an insurance company and a death benefit is paid by the company to the beneficiary in the event the insured dies during the life of the policy . There is one key difference between traditional life insurance policies and mortgage life insurance - the structure of the policy death benefit.Traditional policies feature a level death benefit for the life of the policy along with level premiums for a specified term -LRB- or guaranteed forever -RRB- . Mortgage life insurance features level premiums , but have a decreasing death benefit - much like how a mortgage works -LRB- hence the name -RRB- . In today 's marketplace , the rates/premiums for a traditional policy are very competitive with mortgage insurance rates .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Life insurance is usually not required as a stipulation of getting a mortgage unless the down payment is very low . Then the borrower is required to buy a type of insurance called `` PMI '' , or Private Mortgage Insurance . This coverage would pay the lender what is owed to them in the case of the borrower 's death . However , many people do use regular life insurance to cover their mortgages . Term life insurance can be purchased in the same number of years as the mortgage ; is a reasonable cost for that what can be a large amount of coverage ; the benefit does not decrease as the mortgage goes down ; and it goes to the beneficiary of your choice . Especially with today 's low mortgage rates , it may not be in the best interest of the beneficiary to pay off the mortgage . Having a life insurance benefit to invest or pay other bills could allow the survivor to keep paying the mortgage and keep the home . Or they could pay it off and keep the remainder of the life insurance proceeds .
The Mortgage itself is a Loan Account setting up a method of repayment ; the repayment structure includes interest over the term of the loan . Monthly payments on a mortgage loan account are sometimes referred to as : P&I -LRB- Principal and Interest -RRB- . At the request of the customer and in some cases , as a requirement to the mortgage contract , an Impound Account -LRB- Escrow Account -RRB- will be initiated in order to accommodate the bi-annual payment of property taxes as well as an annual payment of home insurance . This account will pay a nominal interest rate credited to the account at the end of each year . If the customer has an Impound Account , the monthly mortgage payments will include a monthly savings amount which will be deposited directly into the impound -LRB- escrow -RRB- account in order to accumulate funds to pay future tax and insurance invoices . Regarding Homeowners Insurance , the policy must be purchased by the homeowner and the mortgage company must be listed as the Mortgage Loss Payee ; copies of all documents will be mailed to the mortgage company including invoices . If a homeowner does not purchase home insurance , the mortgage contract allows the mortgage company to place ` Forced Insurance ' on the property and charge the surcharged premium to the mortgage account ; this is not in the interest of the homeowner and should be avoided in the interest of premium amount and coverage afforded . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
It depends on your definition of `` necessary '' . It used to be common practice for mortgage companies to sell credit life insurance that would pay the mortgage in the case of the borrower 's death . These policies are n't sold much anymore because they were n't really a good value for the borrower . The rates were high and the death benefits fell over time with the balance of the mortgage . It 's usually a good practice to have life insurance in place to pay off any debts you have including a mortgage . To do this the right way you really need to consider the bigger picture of your life . A mortgage is just one piece of the puzzle that is your financial life . When considering how much life insurance you need , you have to determine what will happen if you die and where that will leave the survivors . Find an agent you can trust and go through the process of this planning . Nobody likes thinking about their death , but the situation exists whether you plan for it or not .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
While a good idea , it is not required by law to purchase a life insurance policy in order to get a mortgage . I assume what you are referring to is Mortgage Protection Insurance -LRB- MPI -RRB- , which would pay your beneficiary so that they could pay off your mortgage in the event of your death . This is not to be confused with Private Mortgage Insurance -LRB- PMI -RRB- which is required to protect the lender in case of foreclosure , and is a legitimate requirement for borrowers who can not put down over 19 % on a home . The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau announced a crackdown this month -LRB- April , 2013 -RRB- on mortgage insurers who give kickbacks to mortgage lenders in return for business . So do n't let your lender make you purchase mortgage insurance from a certain company in order to get a mortgage . If you do wish to protect your mortgage in the case of your death , buying a simple level Term policy is often the most cost effective solution .
When you buy life insurance to cover a mortgage , you can buy your policy in the face amount and term length that you want . Often , that is 30 year term to cover a 30 year mortgage . About 20 years down the road you may have half your mortgage paid off . At that time you could reduce your life insurance policy to half the face amount and save some money . Or you could start out taking half of your coverage in 30 year Term and half in 20 year Term . Buying the shorter term policy will save you some money and when it runs out , you still have 10 years of coverage left . All this is to say , you really ca n't know how much mortgage life insurance costs until you talk to an agent and figure out the best way to set up your policy . Give someone who sells level Term life insurance today ; you will be glad you took the time .
Anytime something major changes in your life it 's a good idea to evaluate the amount of insurance coverage you need . With a mortgage I would recommend a term policy that covers the length of your mortgage . If your mortgage is 20 years purchase a 20 year gauranteed level term , or for a 30 year mortgage purchase a 30 year term . This is the most economical way to protect you and your family if a tragedy occurs . If soemthing happens your spouse has the funds to pay off the mortgage . If not your cost remains level while the mortgage is in force and goes away when the mortgage is paid off . To save money you may want to ask your insurance agent about layering the term policies to cover your mortgage .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Where To Get Cheap Car Insurance For New Driver ?
You can pretty much expect that new drivers will pay more for car insurance than more experienced drivers . That being said , you can probably find `` cheap '' car insurance with some effort on your part and by consulting your Insurance Professional . Like most things though , cheap might not always be the best buy if you need to use it and statistics have shown for many years that less experienced drivers tend to need to use their insurance more than experienced ones .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
Cheap car insurance rates for new drivers are available from many companies . The most important consideration is to utilize an experienced broker to help you find the best prices for the vehicle you own . Liability limits will help determine what you pay and an experienced broker will review the best options and explain which limits are best for you .
By cheap car insurance , I assume you mean low premium . In California inexperienced drivers are charged against one of the household vehicles . The charge is significant . It is tempting to reduce the cost of the policy by reducing the limits on the policy . That could be a very large mistake . In the end the cheapest possible policy is one that makes you whole at the time of a claim .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Cheap car insurance for new drivers can be found by shopping the top-rated companies . An experienced broker -LRB- that 's us -RRB- can quickly take your information and compare dozens of reputable carriers and find the best offers . The combination of knowledge , top-notch websites and decades of experience can help the consumer save as much as 50 % off their premiums . Of course , new drivers may pay higher prices -LRB- initially -RRB- , although the rates will reduce .
Each car in the household is rated on a specific driver . The impact of an inexperienced driver is placed on one car in the household . If the inexperienced driver is the third driver in a two car household the new driver will be assigned as occasional to one of the vehicles . The impact is more significant if the vehicle is new and insured for liability , comprehensive and collision . Some people buy an additional older car so that the inexperienced driver will be assigned to that car . I do not understand the logic in adding two older cars .
You can pretty much expect that new drivers will pay more for car insurance than more experienced drivers . That being said , you can probably find `` cheap '' car insurance with some effort on your part and by consulting your Insurance Professional . Like most things though , cheap might not always be the best buy if you need to use it and statistics have shown for many years that less experienced drivers tend to need to use their insurance more than experienced ones .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
There are many cheap auto insurance companies throughout the US . -LRB- That is ... carriers that charge low rates -RRB- How cheap will your rate be ? It depends where you live and other underwriting factors that could impact the price . For example , while Progressive , Esurance , Geico and Erie may offer low rates in Ohio , in Pennsylvania or New Jersey , a completely different set of companies may be the best option . As experienced brokers , along with our top-rated websites , we search , find and compare the absolute lowest car insurance rates in all ares . That 's our job and a big reason why customers prefer to work with brokers .
Wow . Where should I start ? Well let 's first look at the two major choices . Term or Whole Life . With term , you are basically renting insurance . You have a death benefit during the term of your policy , so long as you pay . You are gambling whether you will die during that period . If you are lucky to live longer , they you get nothing . Not the best of deals that way , but it does give initially cheap protection for a growing family . With Whole Life Insurance , however , you are getting a lifetime financial tool . Whole Life keeps growing and increasing in value and in death benefit . While you are living , you can use Whole Life to take money out and pay for college , pay towards a new home or even a new car , or any emergency . You do not have to cancel Whole Life , you can simply take some money out of it , while continuing to allow it to grow , as though the funds were still in the Whole Life Policy . The premium will NEVER change , although you death benefit can growth an enormous amount . Your family is protect , and you never have to worry about being without life insurance with Whole Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
That is a great question ! There is a reason why things are cheap . You buy a cheap car , you spend a lot on repairs . You buy cheap clothes , they rip or shrink . Term insurance is cheap because it has very few perks , like a whole life policy would . Your term policy will have no cash value , and will end at a specific time . Because there is no management of your cash involved , and the odds are great that the company will collect from you for years and not have to pay you anything , those policies can be sold very cheaply . About the only way that you can stack the odds back in your favor and get money out of your policy would be to get a `` return of premium '' policy or rider . For a larger premium payment , this allows you to receive back most of what you had paid into the policy . If you have questions , feel free to drop me a line , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There 's no doubt about it . Car insurance for teenage drivers is expensive ! New drivers are 5 times more likely to have an accident . The good news is there are ways to lower your cost without sacrificing coverage . The biggest mistake I see parents make is reducing coverage when they add their son or daughter . If your child has an accident the parents will be sued , not the child . If you are going buy a car for your child buy an older vehicle and stay away from sport cars . A Mustang GT is not a good option for lowering your cost . If you are not going to buy a vehicle and have more drivers than cars , then you can list your child as an `` occasional driver '' . Most companies also offer Good Student Discounts and a discount for completing driver 's education so make sure you inquire about both of these for additional savings .
Life insurance is priced the same for everyone . You can not get a discount on life insurance , and the discount store mentality does not work well with life insurance . You need to work with a knowledgeable agent to get your cheapest price . Getting a low quote from someone who knows little about life insurance does not mean you will get that price . I feel that the best way to buy cheap life insurance is to use an agency who can take your health information and match you up with the company that has your best rates . Some , like mine , can be found online . But wherever you go , the place to buy cheap life insurance is where the agent is valuable .
Cheap car insurance can be as little as $ 20 or $ 30 per month , depending on where you live , the type of car you drive , your age , and of course , the liability limits you have . Some carriers offer discounts that can total as much as 50 % . It is , however , important to understand that state minimum liability limits may leave you underinsured . Although low liability limits result in very cheap pricing , it 's important that we , as experienced unbiased brokers , advise you which coverages may be the most appropriate . To find the lowest rates , always utilize an experienced broker . Not only do we offer unbiased advice and top-notch websites , but you can also save time and money by quickly finding the best prices . The quoting process typically takes only a few minutes and you 'll be able to view the best options in your area .
By cheap I assume that you are referring to the premium . The cheap I like to think of is the cost when you have the claim and your company stands behind you and pays everything that you expected . Regardless of the premium , you will then know what cheap really means . A major property loss could take 100 years of premiums to pay for . Having correct coverage is the way to have the truly cheap homeowners policy , find an agent , one you can trust .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Does n't Need Life Insurance ?
Literally everyone . Some who have no family , no friends , no interest in religious groups or political causes , and even no animals , may say they do not . But only in those rare circumstances where the person truly has no one and nothing that interests them , might they claim no need for live insurance . If you have someone or something you love or believe in , you need life insurance to help those people or causes . Thank you . Gary Lane 7144229616
Some people feel that they do not need life insurance because they have saved or invested enough money that their dependents could get along OK without it . If you ask their dependents , you may get another story . The reason I feel that those people might be mistaken is because savings and investments can be depleted before death occurs . Medical bills , rehab , disability , legal costs ... there are many costs involved with getting sick , and possibly no time or method to recoup those funds before death occurs . Term life insurance is not able to be accessed until death , so is safe from being depleted ahead of time . If handled correctly , permanent policies can provide cash value while still retaining a death benefit that will be paid to beneficiaries after the insured person dies . That is one of the main reasons I feel that even people who are financially self sufficient can find life insurance to be important .
There really is n't any type of person that does n't need life insurance . In reality , just about everyone is going to need life insurance at some point in their lives . When you 're a child , many parents look into buying a small whole life policy with future increase option riders -LRB- periodic allowance to increase the face amount of the policy in their adult years - generally this can be done 8 times beginning at age 25 -RRB- as there is no medical exam , given their age . When you 're an adult , you 'll likely have a mortgage for a house , loans for cars , credit card debt , medical bills , burial expenses , etc. , that you would like to have paid off in the event of your death so your family does n't suffer financially due to the lost income . Another common use is income replacement so your family can maintain their current lifestyle rather than having to make dramatic changes . Many people may buy a life insurance policy for estate planning purposes . In short , regardless of where you are in life , you will almost always have a need for coverage .
That is a great question ! There is a school of thought out there , -LRB- Dave Ramsey for example -RRB- that believes that you do not need life insurance . They are right , if you can do the following things : - have sufficient funds available that your spouse or children can live comfortably without your income - that your final expenses are not a financial burden to your spouse or children - that your estate taxes are not going to be a financial burden to your spouse or children - that you have no desire to leave a tax free legacy for heirs or charity . If you can do those things , you really do n't have a need for life insurance , according to thatschool of thought . I personally believe that everyone should have a policy . I hope that helps . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question , and one that I am frequently asked . It 's easier to tell you who does n't need life insurance , than it is who does . There is a much smaller group who do n't . If you have a fund set aside that you will not need to touch during your lifetime for your funeral expenses and final debts , along with a funded plan to provide your equivalent yearly income for your survivors , you do n't need life insurance . Since the vast majority of Americans do n't fit that category , life insurance is probably a good idea . The idea behind the insurance is that you do not leave those behind as financially hurt by your passing as they are emotionally . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
The best Medicare supplement plan is the one that does everything you need and you can afford . If you ca n't afford the plan , do n't buy it . If the plan does n't cover what you expect it to , do n't buy it . All Medicare supplement plans with the same letter are identical in every way . Once you find a plan that fits your needs and budget , buy it . Do n't ever pay too much , thinking you are getting a better policy . You are n't . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
Arizona does not . No-fault auto insurance has the insurance company pay for your damages no matter who 's at fault . In Arizona , we have uninsured and underinsured -LRB- UM/UIM -RRB- insurance for damages other people cause to you if they do n't have insurance or have enough . With state law , you have to sign whether or not you want UM/UIM coverage . Things UM/UIM may cover : A driver hitting you who does n't have insurance A driver hitting you who has insufficient coverage for your hospital bills A hit and run driver A driver who hits you while you 're walking or cycling Your medical bills when you 're a passenger in someone else 's vehicle and they have an accident -LRB- when the other driver 's insurance or theirs is insufficient -RRB- . UM/UIM is an excellent option for people looking for no-fault insurance . In fact , at our agency , we recommend UM/UIM to every one of our policyholders . If you have any questions , do n't hesitate to reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com .
Everyone will always have a need for some amount of life insurance for some length of time . There really is n't any type of person that does n't need life insurance . Many people never think about all the uses for it or the needs that should actually have covered that are n't . Commonly , you 'll likely have a mortgage for a house , loans for cars , credit card debt , medical bills , burial expenses , etc. , that you would like to have paid off in the event of your death so your family does n't suffer financially due to the lost income . Another common use is income replacement -LRB- this is a common one that most people do n't think about -RRB- so your family can maintain their current lifestyle rather than having to make dramatic changes.Many people may buy a life insurance policy for estate planning purposes so they can transfer assets at the lowest possible cost.In short , regardless of where you are in life , you will always have a need for some form of coverage . I hope the input helps - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
How much does life insurance cost for a 24 year old ? Well with all types of insurance , provided you are a healthy individual , the price is pretty low . While Term is cheap at this age , so is permanent coverage and a young person should consider the real advantage of locking in their coverage while it is low cost and has the most time to work in their favor . I am so glad as a 53 year old who at 24 was a very atheletic , fit individual who contracted diabetes at 40 and had a bout with A FIB -LRB- heart problem -RRB- at 53 that I locked up my life insurance in my 20 's , when my good health allowed me to purchase it for cheap money . My rates are locked in , I own the policy , they ca n't take it away , they ca n't make me requalify , the policy does n't `` end '' before I do . This is n't even taking intoaccount all the other benefits a permanent policy provides , but the factit 's `` mine '' I `` own '' it , I do n't rent it .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
AARP does not offer any life insurance - they are only a marketing organization . They associate themselves with certain insurers and allow the carriers to attach their name to a product . For example , life insurance is typically done through New York Life while Medicare Supplement insurance is typically done through United Healthcare . One of my family members who is an AARP member gets letters in the mail frequently for life insurance with the AARP name -LRB- insurance through New York Life -RRB- . However , the coverage is age-banded and only carries the policy through age 80 - the coverage then terminates if they live beyond age 80 with no option to extend the program . Age-banded coverage means the rates change every 5 years as you enter into the next age bracket . They may have other life insurance products available with their name on attached , but that 's what constantly comes in the mail . If you 're looking for term life insurance , I would highly highly highly suggest consulting with an independent agent who can compare multiple carriers for you and discuss your medical history to determine the risk classification each carrier may consider you for -LRB- the risk class directly determines the premiums -RRB- . Shopping before applying is vital ! And there 's no cost to using an independent agent vs. going through a carrier directly . I would n't just buy on name as there are numerous carriers that offer term insurance who offer competitive rates . You can end up spending extra money that you do n't need to when you do that -LRB- that 's not to say a big name carrier would n't in fact be the best cost option , you just want to be sure you 're not overpaying -RRB- . The risk class is key to figure out first and then look at the rates for a given coverage amount/term length from there . If you do n't know what risk class you would likely fall under for a carrier , then a quote is nothing more than a guesstimate . Term life insurance is very straightforward . If you die during the life of the policy , the carrier pays out the death benefit proceeds . If you outlive the term premium guarantee period and and do n't want to pay the annual renewable term rates -LRB- which go up each year as you get older -RRB- , then you would likely either replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy or not have any coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
