start question
life-insurance
What Happens When Term Life Insurance Is Paid Up ?
Actually term life insurance can not be paid up . It just expires or has a steep premium increase many times 1,000 % . The cash value policies such as whole life , universal life , indexed universal life or variable universal life do endow or are `` paid up '' plans in which you are asking . Sorry !
Term life insurance is never paid up . Assuming you make your premium payments , if you are still alive at the end of the term life insurance policy 's stated time period -LRB- e.g. - 10 years -RRB- the policy ends and the life insurance protection ceases . In this case the insurance company has won the bet , you did n't die during the period the policy was taken out for and they get to keep all the premium paid for taking on your risk during that time period . The only exception to this general rule is in the case where a Return of Premium rider was purchased with the term life policy . In this situation if you are still alive when the term life policy reaches the end of its stated period of coverage the policyholder is refunded the premium they have paid to the insurance company over the life of the policy . You do pay additional premium costs for this Return of Premium provision .
Term Life Insurance does not have the option to become paid up , like permanent life insurance does . If you pay your policy each monththrough to the end of the term , the policy simply ends or takes on a higher cost . There is nothing to cash in . Also , you do not have the option to pay term at an increased cost for a shorter time period , like you do with permanent insurance . If you quit paying on it at any time , the policy ends .
That is an excellent question ! One of two things will happen . If the policy was paid up long ago , and has remained in effect , then it acts like any other policy , and when the insured passes , it pays out . Unfortunately , what happens most often is that Parents had a policy on the child , the parent that paid the bills passes , the policy does n't get paid , goes into grace period , and then lapses , and cancels . All those years of payments go up in smoke . Please ensure that your loved ones have a copy , or access to , your finances , sand their payment schedules , so that this does n't happen to you . I have had to have the conversation about unpaid policies far too often , and each time it breaks my heart to see the child realize there is no insurance . Thanks for asking !
A life insurance policy is paid up when all required annual premiums have been paid . If the policy is a `` whole life paid up at age 95 '' contract , the policy is paid up at age 95 . It is important to note that the term `` paid up '' is often misused . In whole life policies that pay policy dividends , the dividend values are frequently used to buy `` paid up additions '' which are paid up , additional amounts of insurance that have cash value and add to the base policy . The cash value of paid up additions may be projected , based on the current dividend scale , to grow to a point in the future where those values may be used to premiums on the base policy . The policy is not paid up when the policy owner pays premiums this way .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
A paid up life insurance policy is one that requires no more premiums for it to remain in effect . In essence , you have paid enough premiums that , left untouched , your policy will stay in effect for the rest of your life . Some people want to quit paying premiums before the policy is paid up , and choose to settle for a `` reduced '' paid up amount of insurance . The same thing happens , the policy will stay in effect with no further premiums paid . But the face amount of the policy will be less than what it was originally .
If a life insurance policy is truly `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due and it is guaranteed to be that way . Some people use the term `` paid up '' incorrectly to describe premium `` offsets '' using dividend values to pay required premiums . Such arrangements are not paid up and not guaranteed . More on this in the last paragraph . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums and are not paid up until age 95 or 100 . A policy can also be `` paid up '' at a lesser value than the death benefit . Whole life policies feature a `` reduced paid up '' non forfeiture provision . In the event the policy owner wishes to stop paying annual required premiums , the policy owner can ask the insurer to reduce the death benefit amount for the policy so that no further premiums would need to be paid . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' . In a low interest environment like we have now , dividends are being reduced from what was illustrated . Many clients who expected to stop paying premiums and instead pay them via the dividend values in their policy can not do so yet since the dividend values are not sufficient to offset premiums .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
what happens to my life insurance when I retire ? If the life insurance is provided by your employer it will depend on what they offer . It might end immediately , it might carry on into retirement or you might be offered to carve out an individual policy from the group plan . There is n't a single answer as plans are different . If you `` own '' the policy what happens to your life insurance is what ever you want to have happen to it .
Neither is ` best ' in terms of comparing one against the other . What you need to look at is what you are going to count on this insurance plan for and why you need it . Term insurance is better for covering large amounts for shorter periods of time , such as putting a policy in place to ensure your children -LRB- or grandchildren -RRB- will have money for college should something happen to you prior to them completing college . Or you could set up a policy that would pay off your mortgage and/or other debts so you do n't leave those behind in the event something happens prior to them being paid off . Whole Life insurance is better for establishing long term wealth accumulation . Here 's an example of the way I set up one of my customers . Since it is possible to have multiple policies , we set up a 10 year term policy listingtheir children as beneficiaries to guarantee they have money for college . We also calculated how much income they would potentially earn during that 10 year period and included that amount so their spouse was n't left without income . Then we set upa 20 year term policy equal to the amount of theirhome mortgage so that would be paid off and calculated who much income they would earn during this next 10 year period.Finally , we establisheda whole life policy witha small face valueto help establishan estate for theirheirs . Since the whole life policy pays out the face value or the cash value , whichever is higher , the ` death benefit ' of the whole life policy increased as time went on . We also established that when the 10 year policy expired , if their income level permitted , they would continue making those monthly payments , but they would add that to the Whole Life policy . Doing this dramatically increased the cash accumulation of that policy after the 10 year mark . So my recommendation for you is to meet with a qualified insurance agent or financial planner to establish the right scenario for you and your family .
That is a great question ! Unlike a whole life policy , which ends when you do , term policies almost always end before you do . It 's why they are so cheaply offered , statistically , the companies rarely have to pay out , compared to whole life policies . So when they do end , you have really only three choices : walk away as if there never was a policy , -LRB- since there is nothing contractually obligating either of you anymore , in the typical policy case -RRB- , hope that the policy has a conversion clause -LRB- one that allows your paid premiums to be converted to a paid up whole life policy with a greatly reduced face value -RRB- , or you renew the policy . If you choose the latter , be prepared for the policy to renew in one year terms , and for the price to go up exponentially each time . They get very expensive very quickly . This can be a real problem if it happens when age or health issues prevent you from finding another company that will write you . This is often the case with the term policies that companies like AARP and AAA offer , policies that end when you turn 80 . With life expectancy now averaging years longer than 80 , and the increasing costs as you age , more and more Elder citizens find themselves out a lot of money , and with no protection . Please be careful when you are looking at these kinds of policies , okay ? Thanks for asking !
This depends on what is happening with the annuity when someone dies and what type of annuity -LRB- owner or annuitant driven -RRB- we 're talking about . For an annuity that is not paying income and the owner is the annuitant -LRB- i.e. the type of contract wo n't matter -RRB- , the cash value of the annuity will be paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- in the contract . If the annuity have been annuitized -LRB- i.e. is paying an income stream -RRB- the chosen option will determine what happens . For life only annuity payments , the payments will stop and no further money will be paid out . For period certain annuities , the income will continue until the period certain has ended . For life with a refund -LRB- installment or lump sum cash -RRB- than the refund will pay the the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- until the cash value of the annuity has been paid out in full to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- .
Really nothing happens when a life insurance policy lapses . That is to say the policy ends and there is no more insurance . There are a couple things that should happen = you should be notified that the policy is going to lapse and it should be explained how you can prevent that from happening . If the premiums are not paid up to keep the policy in force and it does lapse you should be notified of the provision to reinstate the policy and what steps to take and the time limit within which they must be taken .
This is another one of those should n't you ask Suze about ? Suze Orman believes in term insurance for the most part . Her background is as a stockbroker , not as an insurance agent . Her views are shaped by the industry she started in . After the MEC laws came about in the late 80 's , you could n't find many stockbrokers who recommended anything other than term insurance . Probably the biggest reason behind this recommendation was term insurance freed more money for investments which they got paid on , so it made perfect sense to encourage the purchase of term insurance as it freed short term money for investment . The problem is when your investments do n't earn 12 % every year and year after year , things may not work out the way you want . You may find you need life insurance longer than you thought . The real problem with following any financial guru , even if their advice is sound , is what happens when things go off path 10 % or 20 % ? Does the plan collapse ? Was all the investment return earned just you could pay a much higher premium in your old age because you bought term as a young person ? It 's an odd thing to think about in planning but simply ask what happens if you 're wrong ? How much damage hits you if you guessed wrong about the future ? This means taking a broader approach to planning , spreading risk and return to have things work out in different markets . A racing scull is faster than a rowboat , but when a wave hits and flips the racing scull over , but rocks the rowboat , which was a better choice for the body of water ?
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
In the public understanding of the word `` Term '' there is much confusion . In the insurance world term defines the period of coverage with just enough premium to pay for the risk of death and handling costs . Since there is no extra premium beyond this minimal cost factor there is no cash value and at the end of the period the insurance expires the same as insurance on your car , home or liability . The misconception comes when persons get this `` term '' mixed up with paid up policies that are paid up at the end of a certain period . These paid up policies require much more premium and in a nation that has known a lot of inflation are usually not a good buy from a financial standpoint . One of the better types of Life Insurance in today 's market is the Universal Life which can be made into term , paid up insurance , retirement life and many other options . The Universal Life policy puts the policy owner in control but it also means that the policy owner must completely understand the provisions in the policy or it can actually work against the owner . It also means that the financial planner must stay in close contact with the policy owner through out their lifetime . This would be even more true when the financial planner uses term in a total financial program for individuals .
It may be possible for a car insurance company to `` short rate '' your requested cancellation which means that they would retain a certain small percentage above and beyond what has been fully earned for the term and refund you the balance . That had been a more common practice years ago but for the most part , that does n't happen too much any more . For the most part , your policy would be cancelled as requested and the appropriate refund of any pre paid premium returned to you without any additional charge . Naturally , the amount of refund would be determined by the amount you had pre paid or the term and where you happen to be in that term .
Broad questions deserve broad answers and so the question as to taxation of life insurance benefits is this : Generally , life insurance benefits are paid free of income taxation when paid to individuals . But , there are exceptions and possible complications to this simple answer . One big potential problem is when the decedent is also the policy owner and the life insurance gets added to the value of an estate and then taxed in that way . The IRS looks for incidents of ownership up three years prior to the death . Also , life insurance paid to an estate that is subject to other forms of taxation may result in the life benefits being taxed as well so it is n't always a good idea to pay life benefits to an estate . Also , life insurance after the first $ 50,000 is taxed when premium was paid by the employer . Life insurance you buy separately under group options are generally not taxed as income -LRB- provided all the rules are followed - see above -RRB- . Also , generally when a corporation pays the premium and the benefits are payable to the corporation , they ca n't write off the premium and collect the benefit free of income taxation . Under current law life insurance proceeds are only excludable up to the amounts of premium paid by the corpo in following with laws placed on the books in 2006 . There is a whole host of rules that must be followed to avoid taxation but it is possible that life insurance can be paid to a corporation and avoid taxation . While most of us will not be subject to taxation on the life insurance benefit it pays to understand how these benefits become taxable . Then , it is reasonably easy to avoid these pitfalls . Do n't also overlook the advice of a good agent and avoid the use of life insurance trusts to make sure the money moves to the beneficiary without taxation to the largest extent possible .
There are several variables that will determine what happens to the Cash Value -LRB- CV -RRB- . First , as Jerry was saying , in the later years or life of the policy , the Cost of Insurance -LRB- COI -RRB- exceeds the premium you are currently paying -LRB- which hopefully has been level since you purchased it -RRB- . When this happens , the premium would need to increase to keep up with the cost however when there is CV , this is used to pay the difference . Ideally , the crediting rate on the excess funds is enough to provide you with growth even while paying the additional premium . When you take a withdrawal or loan , this effects the CV as well . With a loan , keeping this simple , the death proceeds will be reduced by how much the outstanding loan is . A withdrawal will generally drop the death benefit immediately . When there is enough crediting interest , even with loans and withdrawals , we have seen policies continue to grow . Jerry said it well , Life Insurance is an Asset for you to use . Last , if you have your policy designed with an Increasing Benefit , usually called `` option b '' , the CV will be included into the death benefit . This is one what to stay ahead of inflation especially when you are expected to live a long life .
First , the Reduced Paid Up feature of your policy allows you to stop making premium payments and accept a reduced paid up option for whatever the reduced face amount is at the time you utilize the option . For example if your 20 year old $ 20,000 policy has a Reduced Paid Up of $ 12,000 and you utilize the option you would have a paid up policy of $ 12,000 with no further premium payments required . If the amount of the reduced paid up insurance is sufficient for your personal needs , you could use the money you paid for your policy and pay premiums on a policy for your daughter . This is not complicated at all and replacement is not an issue since you are keeping your policy . The Reduced Paid Up option does not allow for any up front cash however other than the money you save on premiums . Some Mutual companies that pay dividends . You could take the dividends in cash and use them to help pay for a policy if you have a policy that pays dividends . You could take a loan on the cash value of your policy but I really do not recommend doing that since the loan will reduce your death benefit or you could cash surrender a couple of policies if you do not need the insurance .
That is a very good question ! You are kind of between a rock and a hard place . If you contact them , and have a ` safe driver ' bonus , you could lose that , and with the subsequent rate increase , -LRB- if there is no first accident forgiveness plan -RRB- you might well exceed the expense of the repairs . On the other hand , if you do not know the person that she hit wo n't be the type that later claims back injuries or some such thing , and takes you to court -LRB- I 'd wonder about this if he or she documented and/or took pictures , and your wife did n't -RRB- , without the power of your insurance company behind you , you could be in a bigger mess . Another consideration is your deductible - if it 's more than $ 700 , you would end up paying that much anyway , and run the risk of a rate increase . If coming up with $ 700 is an issue , and you have a low deductible , then having the insurance company pay may be an option . Perhaps a good thing to do might be to contact your agent , and tell them you and your wife were talking about what would happen if one of you were to have an accident , and were not sure what would happen if so , and have them explain it to you . If it sounds good , then do it , if it sounds bad , then consider your risks of handling it out of pocket . Personally , I 'd probably call them , and explain it exactly as it happened , and trust my agent to what is best for me . I hope it works out for you , good luck , and thank you for asking !
Not normally . Your home insurance was designed to repair or replace your home if something covered happens to it . Usually , anything below ground is n't covered . Now , if your home is destroyed and the insurance company rebuilds your home , they will usually pay to hook your sewer up , but not to repair or replace the pipes . if you think about the things that can happen to a home , a sewer pipe really ca n't have those things happen to it . My big question here is : what the heck happened to your sewer pipes that you want covered ? Insurance is designed to repair damage that is sudden and accidental . There are n't many things you can do to a sewer pipe that are sudden and accidental . About the only thing I can think of is if someone working underground hits a sewer pipe and breaks it . In this case the company working there is responsible for any damage they may cause .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is : What does term life insurance cover ? Remember first of all , if we 're using term , it only covers that period in time . If you buy a 20-year term , as an example , it 's only going to cover you for 20 years . If you buy $ 1/2 million dollars of death benefit , you 'll have it for as long as you pay your premiums on time ; you 'll have that coverage . What is it good for ? How does it cover ? It 's going to cover anything that you think that you need . Let 's say , at $ 1/2 million , you had a mortgage at $ 250,000 , you had credit card debt , you had car debt , you had educational debt . You want to cover that so that your spouse or your beneficiaries will not be actually saddled with your debt if something happened to you . When I 'm looking at , ` What does term life insurance ? ' it 's the time zone , how long do I have , what obligations would I have , and how can I relieve my beneficiaries from any of those obligations if something happens to me ?
Only you can answer this question of Life Insurance being essential . For those of us who see the financial loss in families who lost a parent or spouse , Life Insurance relieves financial stress allowing you to take care of what is most important , your family . YES , I believe life insurance is essential . Life Insurance provides you or rather your beneficiary with monies otherwise would not be available . You need to look at what is important in your life , who depends on you , your family , perhaps your business and look at what will happen if you are not there `` tomorrow '' . What will happen financially and how would you relieve that financial stress .
Term Life Insurance does not have cash value , but if you get what is called Return of Premium Term -LRB- ROP Term -RRB- , it has a form of cash value . About midway through the term , depending on the policy , it will pay back some of the premiums paid in , IF you cancel the policy . By the end of the term , this type of policy will generally pay back all the premiums you paid in . Some negatives : This cash is not available unless you surrender the policy . If you are table rated , it may be that only the premiums up to standard are paid back to you . The price is substantially higher than regular Term Life Insurance . Some positives : If you bought regular Term Life and invested the extra you would have spent on ROP Term , it could take a return of over 5 % every year on the difference , to earn what you would get back , tax free , by keeping ROP Term to the end . Unlike regular Term , longer terms often cost less than shorter terms , with ROP Term . Finally , getting back all your premiums if you are still alive at the end of the term is a great way to have `` free '' coverage and then get back enough for a final expense fund when the term ends .
The age that Life Insurance ends is dependent on the age that the person was when they took it out , and the type of policy they took out . For Term Life Insurance , the policy ends -LRB- or goes up in price to what is usually an unaffordable cost -RRB- at the end of the term . Therefore , someone who is 55 years old and takes out a 10 year Term policy will have to find a new policy at age 65 . For Whole Life Insurance , the policy ends when death occurs or when the policy matures -LRB- typically at age 100 -RRB- . At either time , the full amount of the death benefit is paid -LRB- when the policy matures , you are actually receiving the cash value , which becomes equal to the death benefit , called `` endowment '' -RRB- . If you quit paying premiums on the policy , or borrow without paying it back , the policy could end sooner without any benefit being paid . This is true for any type of Life Insurance policy . Some Whole Life policies are paid for with a single premium ; as long as you do n't borrow from them , those will be in effect upon death or maturity without paying any more premiums , as will any policy that is `` paid up '' at a certain point . Universal Life operates much like Whole Life , except you can pick an age at which your guaranteed coverage will end .
You should get a life insurance policy when you have a need for the coverage . Many times a need arises when certain life events happen such as getting married , having a child , running a business with partners . For personal insurance , many people get life insurance to protect their family from financial struggles in the event of their death - in these cases , the need may be your family maintaining their current lifestyle -LRB- income replacement -RRB- , paying off your child 's college tuition , mortgage , cars , burial expenses , or other outstanding expenses . For business insurance , if you have business partners , you all may want to set up a buy-sell agreement to instruct what will happen to the ownership of the business in the event one of the partners dies or set up a key-man policy . Many individuals also buy life insurance for estate planning purposes -LRB- e.g. paying off taxes for asset transference -RRB- - you can look in to creating trusts to handle how you want the life insurance proceeds to be distributed -LRB- e.g. a revocable or irrevocable life insurance trust -RRB- . In these cases , you want to work with an independent life insurance agent/broker who has a strong background in estate planning - they will likely have referrals to estate planning attorneys as well .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
I ca n't think of a situation where it would n't be required . Your mortgage company has just lent you a bunch of money to buy a home . They need to be sure that , if something happens to the home , it will be restored to what it was before anything happened . They 're just protecting their investment . The bigger question is `` why would n't you want to insure your home ? '' . You just made a big commitment and have a lot of money on the line . If something happened to your home , what would you do ? Yes , premiums for homeowners insurance are high , but not as high as the repairs you 'd have to pay for if you did n't have insurance . Plus , it not only protects the house , but everything in the house . Most people do n't think they have a lot of money tied up in their `` things '' , but they 'd be astonished to find out what it would cost to replace it all .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
When a life insurance term expires , a few things can happen , depending on the features of your term policy . Sometimes , the policy will simply end , and you must get new one if you want to have continued coverage . Sometimes , the policy can be extended at a higher price or lower face amount . You will know this when you take the policy out . Another thing that might happen is that the policy is changed from a level term to an annually renewable rate . This rate is much higher than your original premium and goes up every year .
The difference between Term Life Insurance and Regular Life Insurance -LRB- whole or universal life -RRB- is somewhat like the difference between renting a home and owning it . When you rent you are paying to have access each month but you have no ownership and are building up no equity in the property . Term Life insurance provides a death benefit for the term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- . If you are still alive at the end of the policy 's term then the policy expires and the insurance company keeps all the insurance premiums you have paid over the term the policy was in effect -LRB- unless you pay extra for a `` return of premium '' rider on the policy -RRB- . Term Life policies do not build up any cash value . Regular/Permanent Life insurance policies , while more expensive , can build up cash value over the years that are a financial asset to the policyholder . A Regular/Permanent Life insurance policy can also be paid up , this means at some point no further premium payments are required and yet the policy remains in effect until the death of the policyholder . This is a very high level and simplified description of the difference between Term and Permanent Life Insurance . I usually recommend that people have a combination of permanent and term life insurance over the course of their lives . As each person 's situation is unique , you should seek out an experienced life insurance agent -LRB- preferably an independent agent who represents multiple life insurance companies -RRB- to help you determine what your needs are and to design the policy or policies that will best meet your needs .
Here are the most common things people look for when buying life insurance from us . 1 -RRB- Price . They are looking for the best price for their health , age , tobacco status , etc. 2 -RRB- Exam . They want to compare policies with and without exam , and decide whether or not taking an exam is worth it for them . The majority of those who look into No Exam coverage do go ahead with no exam because : a. it is all they can get ; b. it is less risky and not much price difference than a medically underwritten policy ; or c. they need the policy in a hurry and are willing to pay extra to not take an exam . 3 -RRB- Length of Coverage : Most people who are not well versed in life insurance are concerned what will happen when their term ends and `` what happens to their premiums '' . When looking for life insurance , a shopper has to understand how different types of policies work , and the agent needs to take the time to make that explanation clear to them . 4 -RRB- Guarantees : They want to know if the premium will go up , if it will pay for death by any reason , if there is a guaranteed cash value , etc. 5 -RRB- Company Stability : They want to be sure that their life insurance company will pay out upon their death .
What happens to an annuity upon death depends on the type of annuity you have and the contractual stipulations . If you have an annuity that was set up to pay out for the rest of your life , there may be not benefit paid upon your death . Some Life Annuities will return what was paid in or pay for a guaranteed number of years . A Joint with Last Survivor Annuity will continue payments to the spouse . For annuities that will are set up to pay a fixed number of years , annuity payments will continue to the beneficiaries just as if they did before . If the annuity was not yet annuitized , the proceeds must be received by the beneficiaries within 5 years . Contact your agent or the company through which your annuity was secured to understand the specifics about your particular contract .
Many things could happen from lieing on a life insurance application . Depending on when the lie is found out about . Reprecusions could be as minor as having the application denied to as severe as criminal prosecution . If the lie is discovered after the death of the insured the the death benefit would more than likely not be paid by the carrier ; the most that the carrier wouldtypicallybe responsible to pay under these circumstances would be the total premium paid in over the lifetime of the policy . If the policy death benefit had been paid already then the carrier will typically request the amount paid back -LRB- possibly less the total premiums paid -RRB- and then may seek criminal procescution . It is best to be as honest as possible during the application process as there is lot of information that is checked and double checked with many sources .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
As mentioned above , a 5 year term insurance is an insurance policy that is in force for 5 years then expires . It is designed for a short term need and or specifically for the purpose of converting to a Whole Life policy within that 5 year period . Most Term policies are `` convertible '' to permanent insurance and some companies limit the type of permanent insurance their term policies may be converted to . In `` converting '' a term to a permanent policy what happens is the face amount of the Term , or a portion of that amount is converted to a Whole Life or Universal life policy without the insured having to undergo additional medical testing or underwriting . The premiums paid to the Term policy are not credited to the new permanent policy and the new premium will be based on the current age of the insured .
My previous career was for a rental company so I have a great deal of knowledge in this area . When determining purchasing insurance when renting a car it is important to consider these main factors . 1 -RRB- Quality of your own insurance policy If you have state minimum coverage dont except much help from your insurance company if something were to happen . 2 -RRB- Purpose of Rental - Yes , The reason why you are renting the car plays a big factor . Some insurance policies will only cover rental vehicles if it is a replacement rental . So if you are renting for a family vacation there is a possibility that you arent covered . Always check with your insurance company . 3 -RRB- Type of Vehicle Another huge factor , a lot of policies wont cover any vehicles that are built on a pick up truck frame . Most consumers are unaware that some minivans and SUVs are in fact built upon a pickup truck frames . The best way to protect yourself against this is to always rent a vehicle that similar to the car on your policy -LRB- If you have a SUV on your policy , you should be safe to drive a SUV -RRB- 4 -RRB- Does your credit card cover it ? A little known benefit -LRB- that most credit cards have -RRB- is rental coverage ! Some will require you to activate it before renting a vehicle while others will give it you automatically . I would always check with your credit card provider to see which type of coverage you have . They often pay for loss-of-use as well which is an extra bonus that most insurance policies wont cover . 5 -RRB- The Length of the rental - The longer the rental the more expensive the rental insurance becomes . At some point the amount of money you are paying for the extra insurance isnt going to be worth it . That breaking point is up to you to decide . 6 -RRB- If something were to happen right now , what can you afford ? I think this is the most important . The most common rental is a 3 day weekend rental . The typical insurance cost for that that length of time can be $ 60 to $ 200 . However , the cost of damage , loss of use , and deductibles can add up to be $ 2,000 and get as high as the total loss value of the vehicle . If you were to total out a vehicle would your insurance cover it ? Or could you afford a $ 20,000 vehicle that you wont drive ? 7 -RRB- Remember it is not your vehicle ! Very often damage happens to our own vehicle and we dont even notice or care because we consider the damage to be minimal . However this is not the case when renting a vehicle . You do not have control over what damages are fixed and which ones arent . So Keep in mind that a ding to you , could be consider major damage to them . At the end of the day , you have to be honest with yourself and determine if purchasing the extra insurance is worth it or not . Not every situation is a same and multiple factors needs to be taken into account .
You ask if `` renters insurance cover break ins '' . I am going to assume you are asking : What happens if the apartment building burns down ? A thief broke into your apartment ? What if a guest slips and injures themselves in your kitchen ? What happens if the apartment suffers water damage ? What about all my clothing , furniture , televsions , computer , iPod , musical or sporting equipment , and my wife 's jewelry ? The answer is yes , Reneters insurance covers all the above . Smart investment .
Does Obamacare effect life insurance ? So far , no . But at some point Obamacare and all that it offers , has to be paid for . There is a serious effort in DC to find tax revenue sources and life insurance and annuities are both being eyed for future tax revenues to support the cost of healthcare . One thing when changes like this happen , and they do happen , what 's in force is usually grandfathered and kept exempt from the action . Usually something like this would apply to future purchases . Just another reason not to `` round to it . ''
Some questions you might ask when considering life insurance are : 1 -RRB- What is the rating of this company ? 2 -RRB- Are the rates guaranteed not to go up ? 3 -RRB- Does this policy have cash value ? If so , please show me an illustration . 4 -RRB- Will you be working with me if I need any assistance with my policy in the future ? 5 -RRB- What happens when the terms ends ? -LRB- if buying Term insurance -RRB- 6 -RRB- What riders are available for this policy ? 7 -RRB- How do I borrow from this policy ? -LRB- if buying Whole or Universal Life -RRB- 8 -RRB- What policy has the best rates for my health ? 9 -RRB- May I also get coverage for my spouse ? 10 -RRB- What if I want to drop this policy in the future ? There are many other questions you could ask , but these are some common ones that people ask me . This assumes you know how much coverage you need , and what type . Otherwise , those are also questions you will want to discuss with your agent .
Paid up value in life insurance is a non-forfeiture provision which is found in most classic whole life insurance policies . Non-forfeitureprovisions are a series of values found within a life policy that give you options if you want to stop making premium payments on your policy . These options are : Cash Surrender : Giving up or selling your policy back to the insurance company for the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy over the years you own it . These values are stated on a chart called Non-forfeiture Provisions contained within your policy . Extended Term Insurance : This provides for the continuation of the full face amount of your policy for a specified period of time based on the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy . The length of time is stated in the same chart listed as non-forfeiture provisions . Paid-up Insurance Value : This provision also is included the the chart of Non-forfeiture provisions and it lists the new face amount of insurance you can elect if you stop making premium payments for the policy . It is based on the cash surrender value of the policy at the time you stop making premium payments . Depending on the length of time the policy is in force this amount may equal the full face amount of the policy , and this amount will be in force for the rest of your life . There are policies that can be purchased with a date where the policy is fully paid up , such as a 20 year payment life , or a life paid up at age 65 . Generally these policies spread a lifetime of premium payments over a shorter period of time making the premium payments slightly more than a traditional whole life policy where premium payments are paid for the life of the insured , and are typically known as a limited payment life policy .
Why do less than half of the U.S. population have individual life insurance ? In my experience , the majority believes their group term life insurance death benefit provided through their employer will be enough to pay their financial obligations at their death . This may be true but only for those who die during their employment . But what is the percentage risk of that happening ? I saw a study on the percentage of all term insurance plans which included group term that was in force when the insured died was less than 2 % . That means 98 % of the insureds and beneficiaries received $ 0.00 dollars from their term insurance plans . Would I advise not buying term insurance ? ` NO ' but I would only use term insurance to pay for temporary needs for cash , such as : payment of the Mortgage balance , cash to provide for children 's education , and debts that will be paid off prior to retirement . For financial obligations beyond retirement will need to be covered with personal savings or permanent life insurance plans . But for most savings or permanent insurance proceeds are insufficient to provide the Lifetime Income need for their Surviving souse . However , there is a NEW product design available that is much more affordable when Survivor income is the need . It has no product equal . It 's filed and approved in 47 states as a Reversionary Annuity . It 's a Survivor lifetime annuity that you do not have to fully fund .
If it 's a permanent life insurance policy that builds cash value , you can borrow from it . The amount that can be borrowed depends on how much cash value has accrued inside the policy . When you borrow money from a life insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the money is expected to be paid back and loan 's require interest to be paid on the loan . If the insured dies and there is an outstanding loan balance on it , the beneficiary would receive the death benefit less the loan amount and any interest due on the loan . It may be helpful to discuss it with your agent before borrowing from the policy to find out more about what will happen -LRB- e.g. what 's the interest rate that will be attached to the loan -RRB- when you borrow from the cash value .
Universal life policies are somewhat tricky . What happens when you cancel a universal life policy depends on when you cancel the policy . In the beginning years of a UL it has no cash value accumulated , so if you cancel during that stage nothing happens other than the policy terminates . You get no money back . In the mid range years of the policy it will likely have some cash value , so if you cancel it during that period you may receive the cash value . In the later years of a UL , unless you have kept pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' , -LRB- in other words paid increasingly higher premiums -RRB- , the cash value that has accumulated may be reduced by they increasing cost of insurance until there is no more cash value remaining . At that point the policy may terminate . So if you cancel the policy while it has cash value you will receive the cash value . If there is no cash value when you cancel the policy it will simply terminate .
Life insurance policies can be participating or non-participating . Participating policies share in the divisible surplus of the insurance company and receive dividends , non-participating do not . These type of dividends are in essence a refund of premium . One of the dividend options available is paid up additions . Paid up additions are like a fully paid up versions of the policy to which they are attached . The paid up additions , have a cash and death value and also attract dividends . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
That is a great question ! The best answer I can give you is as soon as it is possible . You should n't count on Social Security or Medicare to be solvent after the next 10-15 years . Economists are predicting a monstrous rise in the poverty rate when that happens . I 'm not a doomsayer , but unless something radically different starts happening with the people we elect to govern us , it 's most likely that those programs go belly up . If that happens , you haveabout that long a head start to put away as much as you can . The rule of thumb is 8-10 times your current salary , to live as you do now . Please start a savings plan today . If you need help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Let me ask you this : expensive compared to what ? A Maserati is expensive compared to a Honda . A 50 room mansion is expensive compared to a studio apartment . The cost of hiring a chief executive officer for your company is expensive compared to the cost of hiring a file clerk . I think you have to look at what youre getting for your dollar . And what your other options might be . Lets suppose you go through prequalification . Then underwriting . Then you get approved . Then you get your policy and pay for it . You submit one monthly premium payment . And then tragically , you die . Your beneficiary will then get the full benefit . Within a week or so . You may have paid only a few hundred dollars , but the benefit could be in the millions . You may paid only a few thousand dollars , but the benefit could be in the tens of millions . That is a pretty good deal . Lets suppose your premium was $ 500 a month , and your benefit was $ 5 million . That could happen , depending on age and other underwriting factors . If you decided to not purchase life insurance , how much money would you have to invest , at what interest rate , over what period of time , to accumulate $ 5 million ? The fact of the matter is that for the vast majority of people , they would end up spending much more money on that investment than they would on life insurance . So the real question is why is self-insurance so expensive ? How can buying a life insurance policy be so much cheaper than trying to fund your financial security out of your own resources ? And dont forget the big game-changing factor : we never know when our time will come . Dont assume time will be on your side so you could eventually collect the money to self-insure .
That is an excellent question ! I am very hesitant to use the word investment when talking about life insurance in any sense , as it is n't designed to be like the stock market or mutual funds , where you invest a lump sum , and gain or lose off the investments ' growth . With life insurance , you make a steady payment , the premium , and the return for that payment is clearly defined : the face value , or death benefit . That said , it is a very common event that the amount of premiums paid are far less than the payout when it happens , but the insured is n't there to gain from it , as it only pays out when they pass . I 'd say that they are theoretically more like a savings account than an investment , as they are an excellent way to get cash when it might otherwise not be loaned to you . You can borrow out of the accumulated premiums that you have paid in . Another way that it will be a smart financial move for your children is that purchased as children , you lock in a very inexpensive price for the policy , that will never change . From that respect , you can save them a ton of money over the years from what they would have paid , purchased later in life , with health issues . Many companies will also allow for periodic increases in the amount of insurance without questions , a godsend if the child has developed issues with their health . I 'd love to discuss this with you privately , please contact me . Thanks for asking !
Most people choose term life because they get a higher coverage amount for each premium dollar spent . The other time when term is used most efficiently would be to ensure financial stability . For example , let 's say you have 10 years left before you and your spouse retire . In that time , you plan to be heavily funding your savings and retirement plans to meet your needs in your later years . If you pass away before that happens , your spouse might be left with minimal funds to live on . A 10 year term policy would ensure that the funding is completed whether you live or not . Another example is when your kids are approaching college age and you do not have a large amount of savings set aside already . Many people plan to ` pay as they go ' with the college expenses , but what would happen if you passed away before that ? Term insurance could make sure the financial obligations for their education could be met .
Term Life Insurance is coverage that will pay out if you die before the end of the term . E.g. Let 's say you have 10 year term life insurance and let it go when the term ends , because you do not want to pay the higher premium that begins at year 11 . If you die midway through year 11 , the policy will not pay a death benefit . In contrast to that , Non Term Life Insurance will pay out for as long as it is set up to pay out . Most people select a non term policy that will last their entire lifetime . There are other differences between Term and Non Term -LRB- usually called Permanent -RRB- Life Insurance . Permanent Life Insurance can have cash values , whereas Term Life Insurance almost never has cash values . You can design Permanent Life Insurance to be paid up in a certain number of years , so that you do n't have to bother with paying premiums later in life . Term Life does not have that option . Some Permanent policies are more flexible than Term . As you might expect , the cost of Term Insurance is usually less than is the cost of Non Term Insurance . It can be helpful to discuss your needs with an experienced agent so that you can balance cost with getting the best type of coverage for your needs .
I ca n't imagine why you would want to just cancel your Whole Life insurance policy ! You know that you have the option of replacing your current policy with another policy and have all the value of the current policy transferred to the new policy ? However as you asked what happens when you cancel a whole life policy - what happens is you no longer have the insurance . If the policy has grown sufficient cash value to cover the surrender fees and have an excess , you should be able to receive the remaining cash value at the time of cancellation . You really should talk with a qualified Insurance Adviser and find out what your options are and then decide how to proceed .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
The best time to have Life Insurance is at the time of death . Unfortunately we do not know when that will be or how it will happen as we look into the future . If you had a crystal ball and knew exactly when and how you are going to die , then you would get the cheapest insurance for the highest death benefit you can afford . So , the question is what will happen to my family if I die tomorrow ? At age 65 or later . If you have children , then your priority is probably with providing coverage until they become the adults you want them to be . Term Life Insurance is a good solution for this type of coverage . If you are older , perhaps it is more of a Final Expense approach or perhaps an Estate Planning coverage with Permanent Life Insurance providing the best solution . Here is the catch : the older we get , the more health history we have , the higher the premiums will be no matter what kind of Life Insurance you get . It is all about planning for now and for the rest of your life .
This refers to a term life insurance policy and the time period that the policy at the quoted rates would remain in effect . As its name implies , term life insurance , runs for a stated period of time -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 year terms -RRB- . If at the end of that time period the policy holder has not died then the policy ends and the insurance carrier keeps all premiums paid during the life of the policy . A 10-Year Term Life policy means a policy that will cover the policyholder for a period of 10-years at the rates quoted or subject to whatever rate terms as associated with the policy . For example , a person might purchasea $ 50,000 10-year Term Life Insurance policy which would mean that if the policyholder kept their policy paid up and died during that 10-year coverage period the life insurance company would pay $ 50,000 to the person 's beneficiary . Term life insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance and builds up no cash value as opposed to permanent life insurance which is more expensive . Many people use a combination of term and permanent life insurance to protect them and their families for the financial risk of the death of the policyholder at different stages in their life . For example , a man in his 40 's with a mortgage and children getting ready for college may have need for more life insurance than he will when he is 65 , retired and an empty nester . Proper structuring of a life insurance portfolio over the course of a person 's life can help achieve this goal most cost effectively .
That is a great question ! A lot of people have a hard time with the concept of insurance . I 'm young , nothing will happen to me ! Or I 'm a good driver , why do I need insurance ? But inevitably things do happen . You can be the best driver ever , but that does n't mean the teenager texting in the car behind you is ; or that something can go wrong , and you 're laid up in the hospital . Homeowners is the same way . No one thinks that things will go wrong with their house , why would I want it ? Insurance is there to protect you when things do go wrong . You would not think the insurance was a waste of money when you got the check to replace your belongings , or the one that allows you to pay for the hotel rooms that you are forced into when your home is damaged . Insurance is only a waste of money when you drastically undervalue it . Please consider it as protection , and not a waste . Thanks for asking !
Term life insurance is life insurance that covers you for a `` term '' , or temporary period of time . The most common terms are 10 , 15 , 20 , or 30 years . The premium will usually stay the same during the term , then jump up to a very high price at the end of the term . After that , it will continue to go up every year . Some policies simply end when the term ends . Term policies have no cash value . You will not receive any money back -LRB- unless you took ROP term , in which case it would return the premiums you paid in , at the end of the term -RRB- . People buy Term insurance for it 's relatively low price . If you can afford to pay the premiums for Whole Life or Universal Life , you might end up paying less overall , because your premiums can end at some point but your policy can stay in effect . With Term , when you quit paying premiums , your coverage ends . If you have a temporary need , Term can be a great choice .
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
What to know when buying disability insurance ? First and foremost find and read aloud the definition of disability . What has to happen to meet the requirement for the policy to pay you ? No matter what a policy might offer numbers wise , it is the definitions that determine if you get paid or not .
That is a great question ! I have a great answer - it means that there is no more cost for your coverage , it is paid off ! There are a couple of ways that you have reached this great place . You might have purchased a policy that was structured to have higher premiums for a period of time , allowing the costs of the policy to be paid off more quickly than the traditional whole life policy would normally have . These policies are more expensive than the traditional whole life policy , but are perfect for someone who may be working , and not want to carry that monthly expense into retirement , yet still wants whole life coverage . For someone who wants to maximize retirement money , this may be a great financial decision . The other way that you might have gotten here is by converting an expiring term life policy . Often when a term policy reaches a point near its end date the option to convert your premiums paid over the life of the policy to payments on that company 's whole life policy that would most closely match your term policy in price . If you choose that option , then the company considers what you have paid on the term as the purchase price for a single payment on a whole life policy , and the face value is determined by that price . For example , I have a client whose $ 100,000 term policy allows him the option to convert it . If he chooses to do that , the premiums he would pay on the policy over the life of the term would purchase about $ 43,000 worth of whole life insurance that is paid up free and clear . He would have that coverage and not ever owe another penny on it . If you have any further questions , I hope you feel free to contact me and ask , I 'm happy to help . Thank you for asking your question !
A fully paid up life insurance policy means that no premiums are necessary to keep the policy in force . Depending on how the policy was built , the paid up status may be sometime in the future because you are paying more premium initially . Or the paid up status could be immediate . Whole Life Insurance often times has a paid option during the premium paying years . You might see on an illustration a paid up column meaning that is the death benefit you can get if you stop paying premium at that time .
What happens to long term care insurance if not used ? Well , what happens depends on the policy provisions . The policy may do many things from transfer to another person , pay out a small death benefit or absolutely nothing at all . This is why the details of choosing a policy are important . The details of a LTC plan are very important , more so than price .
One of two things happens at the end of the term of term life insurance depending on the contract . One is the policy simply cancels and nothing else will happen . Second are more common is you will experience a steep premium increase usually 7 to 10 times the price . Some policies allow you to convert to a permanent whole life plan but could be expensive or you can just purchase another term life insurance plan assuming your health is still OK .
That is a great question ! When you stop making payments on your policy , it will enter into what is called a `` grace period '' , and then will `` lapse '' , or end . With a term policy , that is generally no big deal , you do n't lose anything by letting that happen . Your whole life policy can be a whole different story . With the whole life policy , over time it builds a cash value , one that will be kept by the company , should you allow the policy to lapse and poof up in smoke . The better thing to do in the case of a whole life policy is to either `` surrender '' it -LRB- and get your cash back -RRB- or take it as `` paid up insurance '' , have some coverage , and no more payments . Please feel free to contact me if you need help with this , okay ? Thanks for asking !
This is a bit more complicated than just considering when you should purchase LTC . Sure , the younger you are the less expensive it will be . Many companies are getting out of the business due to reserve requirements along with claim history . The question I tell people to consider is how to get the protection you need while getting the most value from the premium you are looking at spending . Example : Did you know that you could have Critical & Chronic Illness protection within your term life insurance or permanent policy ? Consider , you get the death benefit of course when you die but what happens leading up to this ... you are surviving a medical event that could financially devistate your family . Where will you get the funds to support the family , medical expenses , etc. ? How about from your Life Insurance policy . Instead of just getting one benefit , you can have access to 3 ... . Now that is what I call value . Please note that you accelerating the death benefit so when you die , the death benefit may be reduced . With some planning you can make sure you have the strategies to protect your family and their financial future . Long-Term care insurance is something that everyone is going to need sometime in their future . And there are several ways to get the protection you need . Be sure to look at all the options before signing up for any policy .
What do you need to know about term life insurance ? You need to know that : 1 -RRB- Unless you have some type of rider stating otherwise , term life insurance will jump way up in price at the end of the term , and go up in price annually after that . Or it will end at the end of the term . 2 -RRB- Most term life insurance will stay the same premium during the entire term , and the death benefit will stay the same for the entire term . But you need to ask your agent to make sure you are buying a guaranteed level premium , and a guaranteed level death benefit , to be sure . 3 -RRB- There is no cash value in term life insurance . Only ROP -LRB- return of premium -RRB- term will pay back a substantial cash value if you keep it enough years , and are alive at the end of the term . 4 -RRB- If you miss a payment more than two months , your term policy will end . There is no cash value in it to pay the premium , so it is very important to keep up your payments with term life insurance . 5 -RRB- Many term policies are convertible to permanent insurance for at least part of the term period . If you convert your term policy , you must convert it to the policy or policies stipulated by the life insurance company at that point in time . These policies may or may not have lifetime guarantees , but will be UL or WL . The rate will be based on your age at the time of conversion . There are no health requirements ; your permanent policy will be rated similarly to what your term policy was rated .
A paid up life insurance policy is exactly what it sounds like - it is a policy that is all paid for . Therefore , no more premiums are due while the policy remains in force and the death benefit will be paid upon the death of the insured . These usually are an option when someone stops paying on a whole life policy before age 100 . The premiums that the insured has paid up to that point are used to purchase a `` paid in full '' policy , of course with a lower death benefit than the original policy was offering . For more information connect with me at : www.PaInsuranceMadeEasy.com
When a life insurance policy is paid up it simply means that no more premiums are due to maintain the death benefit . It is like paying off your car . Mutual companies who pay dividends allow you to take your dividends in the form of paid up insurance . This allows you to increase your death benefit . With whole life policies you can also take a reduced paid up policy which allows you to stop making premium payments in exchange for a lesser face amount that would be considered paid up .
You life insurance proceeds will last according to the type of policy you got . If a Term policy , the policy will specify a certain number of years , such as 10 or 20 . When the end of the term comes up , the policy will end or jump up in price to an incredibly high price . If death occurs during the term , the policy proceeds will be paid . If death does not occur during the term , no proceeds are paid . If Whole Life that you have not borrowed against and have made payments according to schedule , the policy will pay out when you die or when it matures -LRB- usually at age 100 -RRB- , whatever comes first . If Universal Life , the proceeds will last for as long as the policy was set up to last , and according to how it is performing . UL usually has a guaranteed no lapse period of a set number of years , as long as premiums are made . If the interest rate goes up , it can last longer .
When life insurance is paid up , it simply means that no further premiums are required to keep the policy in force . The policy may have been set up to where you only needed to pay a single premium in a lump sum . Or it may have required that you paid premiums for a certain number of years , and then it became paid up . In any event , you owe no more premiums and your beneficiary would receive the full face amount or more , if you passed . Or you may have decided to quit paying on the policy early , and were given theoption to take it as a reduced paid up policy . In this case , the face amount will be less than what you originally applied for , but the reduced face amount will stay in effect without you paying any more premiums .
That is an interesting question ! I want to make sure you understand what exactly you are asking , and what would happen , as it seems as if the agent you spoke with may have misunderstood you . You have 6 policies totaling $ 31k in face value . Without knowing how long you 've had them , let 's assume they are each at least a couple of years old . There are some things to be aware of here - taking reduced paid up coverage on 4 of them might seem like that would leave you with about $ 20k in coverage , but chances are it will actually be considerably less than that . How much coverage were you wanting to keep on yourself ? The second thing to be aware of is that you wo n't receive any money from taking the reduced coverage , only what you would have paid monthly on them . So again , understanding that I have no information on your policies to go on , let 's assume that they are all for $ 5k apiece and you pay $ 40 total a month in premiums . What you will gain from taking the reduced coverage is considerably less than $ 20k insurance for you , and $ 40 a month more money . Assuming that you are good with considerably less insurance coverage for yourself , and that your daughter 's policy can be purchased for less than that $ 40 a month , you are good to go . Since you are not surrendering any of the policies , there are no replacement issues to worry about , as you 're not replacing anything . There 's a whole lot more information that I would need to really steer you right , so maybe it would be wise on your part to contact someone other than whom you spoke with the first time , and get a better idea . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Term life insurance is good to pay large expenses that only last for a set length of time . A mortgage , small business loan , or tuition loan are some large liabilities that most people do not have the money saved up to pay off , if they should die prematurely . But they are expenses that will not last forever . Therefore , Term insurance is a low cost way to cover those large debts for a set period of time , without breaking the bank . Another thing Term insurance is good for is raising a family . I recommend purchasing Term insurance long enough to get the youngest child to at least age 23 . Not in every case , but generally , I feel that Term insurance is not good for small face amounts . Most people who rely on life insurance to cover small debts , will also need life insurance to cover their final expenses . There are so many reasonably priced Whole Life policies that can be purchased in very small face amounts , and for persons of all type of health . And you can really save a lot of money on those policies by buying them at a younger age . Some can be paid up in a set number of years , and some have such good cash value that , if you decided to stop paying on the policy in the future , you would still have a decent sized paid up policy to hold onto . Of course , Term Life is also not good for any need that does not end until death . E.g. Funeral costs , paying estate settlement costs , passing money to grandchildren , etc. . Unless you know that you will have a large stream of money in the future so that you can afford to convert your Term insurance to permanent later on , you are usually better off just buying Whole Life or guaranteed no lapse Universal Life , to start with , for needs that do not end until death . Those are my general opinions on what Term Life Insurance is good for , and what it is not so good for . There are many exceptions as each person 's situation is different and policies can be set up to accomplish different purposes . Please do not hesitate to give me a call if you 'd like to discuss this in person .
When youre looking at the question of what comes first retirement or paying off debt , the answer is paying off debt . But everything really starts with a good self-inventory of your income and expenses and setting up a budget so you can start telling your money where to go instead of wondering where it all went . If you have never made a budget I can send you a free worksheet that outlines the different categories and roughly how much of your income should be going to each . After you have your budget in place your next step is to set up an emergency fund minimum of $ 500 to $ 1000 . Having an emergency fund can take the pressure off of lifes curve balls when they happen and it helps you stay on track with your budget . Then you should start paying down your debt , start with the smallest bills first , once one is paid off add that payment to the next smallest bill . Its like a snowball rolling downhill gaining momentum tackling bill after bill with more force . Your next step is to build your emergency fund up so that it could cover 3 to 6 months of your expenses in case of job loss or medical illness . Once thats in place then you can look at retirement planning . If you have any questions please feel free to call me .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Great question ! There are a couple of things that you want to ask yourself before shopping for a policy . Ask yourself : What do I want this policy to do for me - provide burial expenses , transfer wealth to my survivors , provide a potential retirement income , or protect against a major expense like college or a mortgage ? How long will I need this coverage ? If you want it to last as long as you do , then you would want to look at a whole life policy instead of a term product . If you are looking to cover a short term risk , then a term policy is the better choice . Once you have an idea of what you want the insurance to do for you , figure out what you can afford to spend . Remember that life insurance is like buying a new car . You stop making timely payments , and one day your car is gone . The same thing happens to the money that you have paid into your policy . Find an independent agent , -LRB- one not tied to a specific brand -RRB- who can help you compare companies , policies , and what they will do for you.If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to make time for you . Thanks for asking !
Life Insurance matures when the guaranteed cash value of the policy equals the face amount of the policy . This can not happen in Term life because there is no cash value in Term insurance . Whole Life and some Universal Life policies will mature if the proceeds are not paid out as a death benefit prior to the policy maturing .
Term Life Insurance is temporary life insurance . It is sold for a fixed period of time -LRB- term -RRB- and so long as the premium is paid , it will continue for that period and that period only , then end . After that a new policy must be bought , frequently at a substantially higher premium . Group Term , is term coverage which is bought through a group , usually at work , but sometimes as a member of an organization . The healthy folks usually pay more and the sicker folks usually pay less , so it all evens out for the insurance company . If your health is good , you usually will get a better rate on your own . When you leave the group or work place , you will lose your group term insurance . The best insurance is permanent insurance that you personally own , not through a group . This is Whole Life . You can keep it for your lifetime as long as the premiums have been paid up . The premium never goes up and it never ends , unlike term , where 97 % of folks let it lapse , losing all the money they paid for term . You can get information on all these choices from an experience life agent . Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life . 9497972424 , Thank you .
What a retirement plan does is provide financial security . If you are referring to a Registered Retirement Plan then then plan enjoys tax deferred growth . The income is taxed on withdrawal , but tax deferred growth allows for the full effect of compound growth . If you referring to a retirement plan , then you are working towards having what you want to happen , happen . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Term Life means life insurance that will end after a certain term , or number of years . E.g. 20 year Term will end after 20 years . It is assumed that the price will stay the same for the entire term , but not every policy 's price is guaranteed to stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for the entire term . So look at that feature when you pick out your Term policy . Also , Term life does not usually just end when the term ends ; it usually jumps way up in price and then can go up every year after that . If you need to keep the policy for a short time after the term ends , it is possible , but not economically feasible for most people to keep up for very long . When the term ends , most people buy a new policy , if they are able to qualify for one at that time .
Term life insurance can not be called an investment because it does not return profit by way of interest , income or appreciation in value . But when is it a good idea to spend your hard earned money on term life insurance ? That answer is , when you have a temporary need and want some relatively low priced life insurance to cover it . Some examples are : You want your 3 year old child to be able to graduate from college if something happened to you . Getting 20 year Term would do the trick . You want enough money to pay off your mortgage so that your spouse would not have to rely on your second income to make the house payment . 30 year Term life insurance , in that situation , could save your family untold heartache and lots of expense at a tragic time . In these situations , Term Life insurance could be considered a wise expenditure .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
This depends on the type of contract . There are two types of annuity contacts : 1 . Owner driven contracts 2 . Annuitant driven contracts What happens on death depends on which type . For an owner driven contract , when the owner dies the contracts cash surrender value is paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- of the contract . For annuitant driven contracts , when the annuitant -LRB- not necessarily the owner -RRB- dies the cash surrender value of the contract is paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- of the contract . Almost all contracts issued today are owner driven contracts . Most annuitant driven contracts found today are older annuity contracts . It is prudent to figure out which kind of contract you have , especially if you have a different owner and annuitant .
What happens when your Term life Insurance policy `` runs out '' or expires or lapses is all the same : Nothing . You no longer have any insurance coverage . And since Term insurance has no cash value you do n't get any kind of refund or surrender value . The only exception is if you had purchased a `` Return of Premium '' rider with your policy . I that case you most likely will receive a portion of the premiums paid in returned to you .
Term Life Insurance Ends when the contract period is over . Term life Insurance ends when you havent paid your premium and the reinstatement period is over . Term life insurance ends when a death claim occurs while the policy is in force . Term life insurance ends and permanent life insurance begins when the conversion privilege is exercised on the existing term life insurance policy .
This is a great question that I was just answering last night with another client . The first and foremost thing that you should look for is an agent . Even though much of the world buys insurance over the phone , a local agent can help you determine what types of coverage you want and need and is familiar with the local area . Being familiar helps in determining the reconstruction cost vs the selling price vs the tax value . All three numbers are usually different . Most people do not want to be either under or over insured , and a local agent will help with that . The second thing to look for is the company writing the policy . You will never know how good your insurance is until you need it . When a minor claim happens typically every insurance company will be able and willing to pay the claim . It is when the catastrophic occurs that you really get what you pay for . Thousands of dollars and many hours can be wasted when your insurance company is unwilling to agree with you . This is also another reason to have local agent representation . Third and finally is look at what other coverages are available and discuss whether or not you want to buy those coverages or self insure . Some of my favorite must haves are : replacement cost on contents , increased construction costs and replacement cost on the home itself , a deductible that you can afford to pay tomorrow if needed , sewer back up if you live downhill of anyone , A-rated carrier , and local claims personnel . There are many more topics that need to be discussed and reviewed which is why my # 1 recommendation on what to look for when buying home insurance is a great local agent .
This is the amount of insurance that if you stopped making premium payments today and elected to take a paid up policy , you would have that amount of insurance for the rest of your life . A 20 pay life policy would be paid up in 20 years with no premium due after that time while the insurance is still in force . A whole life policy can have a reduced paid up option after enough cash value has accumulated in the policy to provide a paid up policy . This table can be found in your policy . A good agent can help review your policy with you to help you understand your non-forfiture options
A Term life insurance policy is one that will have the same premium for a set number of the years in the term . Some Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium will not go up for the entire term ; other Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium can not go up for part of the term . E.g. 30 year Term life may be guaranteed not to go up in price for the full 30 years , or it can be guaranteed not to go up for 20 of the 30 years and `` hope '' that it wo n't go up the last 10 years . Term life insurance does not have any cash value . If you quit paying on Term life , it will end after one month .
You have been operating your business for 6 years without incident which is great . This is the first claim -LRB- and hopefully last claim , -RRB- so I understand your concern about your premiums increasing next year . I 'm not exactly sure what your business does , but knowing what you do would help me to further figure out whether or not your premiums would increase because of this claim . When re-marketing your account with other insurance companies we would need to explain what happened and discuss the likelihood of this happening again . Insurerslook at the historical data associated with past claims , current trends , andalso consider estimations of future losses to help determinethe rates that they use.This is a great question and thereare several things you need to consider.When you get a moment , turn to the conditions section of your CGL policy . The conditions state what your duties are in the event of occurrence , claim , or suit . 1 . Notify company of occurrence a . You must see to it that we are notified as soon as practicable of an `` occurrence '' or an offense which may result in a claim . To the extent possible , notice should include : -LRB- 1 -RRB- How , when and where the `` occurrence '' or offense took place ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- the names and addresses of any injured persons and witnesses : and -LRB- 3 -RRB- The nature and location of any injury or damage arising out of the `` occurrence '' or offense . b . If a claim is made or `` suit '' is brought against any insured , you must : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Immediately record the specifics of the claim or `` suit '' and the date received : and -LRB- 2 -RRB- Notify us as soon as practicable If you read the `` Obligations at Insureds Own Cost `` condition it says : `` No insured will , except at the insured 's own cost , voluntarily make a payment , assume any obligation , or incur any expense , other than for first aid , without our consent . '' There are many questions that would need to be answered , but if I were you I would put my insurance carrier on notice that there has been an incident and let them take the reigns . Please contact me if you have any additional questions or concerns about this claim . I would be happy to help guide you in the right direction . Have a great weekend . Best , Josh DeBoer
Life insurance is about paying money to beneficiaries when the insured person dies . Property insurance pays when something happens to your property , health insurance pays when something happens to your health , disability insurance pays when something happens to your ability to work , and life insurance pays if something happens to your life . However , some life insurance policies also have cash that can be accessed while you are alive .
The major advantage of Term Life Insurance is it 's low cost per thousand dollars of coverage . Of course , this price goes up drastically when the term ends , so that is only an advantage if you no longer need the policy after the term expires . Another advantage of Term insurance is that it usually does ensure that you are insurable the rest of your life . If you get a policy that can be converted to permanent insurance for a number of years after the policy was issued , you can change it to Whole or Universal Life with no health questions asked . The price will be high , because it is permanent insurance and will be issued at the older age you are when you do the conversion . But that still is a major advantage , if you would happen to be diagnosed with a serious illness and are unable to get a new policy .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
First let me ask you if you purchased temporary Term coverage , or permanent , Whole Life coverage ? If it is Term , then , so long as you continue to pay the premium , it will last for the period you contracted for , as level term , and then the rates will rise considerably . 97 % of folks let their Term policy lapse before that ever happens . I always recommend Whole Life , because it last a lifetime , if you pay the premiums , and those premiums NEVER increase , and also it builds up cash value which you can borrow against , or take out tax free to pay for college , retirement , or a new home . While more $ at first , eventually it actually becomes less expensive than term , as its built up value can pay the premiums for you . A quality company can provide you with a variety of choices . Call me , Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .