start question
annuities
Which Is True Regarding Variable Annuities ?
A variable annuity is a contract issued by a life insurance company . It has the standard features of other annuities but the cash value is directed by you the policy owner . You select which funds will accumulate money . Depending upon the variable annuity and the options included you might be able to continue to direct the investments through the phase where the company is paying you a lifetime income . In that case your income during annuitization can rise and fall with the underlying values of the securities you selected .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
Annuities , either fixed or variable can be a good choice for providing retirement income for some of us , depending on particular situations . The major security concern relative to annuities is the financial strength of the insurance company that you choose or have chosen . You often hear the term `` guaranteed income '' associated with annuity advertising and marketing . However , if the insurance company that holds your annuity money goes bankrupt , you could lose some or all of your hard-earned retirement money . Some States have funds that can help reimburse some of the many policyholder losses in such failure situations . Also , the Feds can step-in , as we found out several years ago but there is no guarantee that will happen . So , insurance company failure is a very real concern , particularly with regard to annuities , although bankruptcy not very likely with regard to the most financially secure companies . The bottom line is that you have to feel very comfortable that your annuity money will be there when and how you are scheduled to receive it . Stay with the strongest companies financially . Ask for documentation of financial strength and ask a lot of other questions . Be as comfortable as possible with the carrier who is going to be controlling your hard-earned money .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Long-term care insurance is kind of like life insurance in the way that you should purchase it as early as possible . If you wait until your health is bad you may not qualify for the insurance . And , none of us know when our health will start going downhill . People might become uninsurable due to sudden and unforeseen events . Do you purchase automobile insurance after an accident ? Do you purchase homeowners insurance after your house burns ? The answer to both of these questions is no . And , the same is true for long-term care insurance . If you have friends or family that are younger than forty they may want to look into it at a younger age . I just read the answer for Gary Lane , and if you live in California I would recommend you contact him regarding the life insurance with living benefits . As an independent agent in Florida , I have access to at least a couple of those companies , as well . Gary , I would certainly like to talk to you about those companies and products if you are willing to share some information with me . One more thought regarding the best time to purchase insurance , if it is not affordable now when will it be affordable ? It does not get cheaper as you get older . It gets more expensive .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
A non-qualified , tax deferred fixed rate annuity is only as guaranteed as the contract provisions outline and is only as good as the annuity insurance company that issued the contract . That being said , many financial stable annuity insurance companies offer a non-qualified tax deferred fixed rate annuities , generally at 5 , 7 and 10 year periods . A non-qualified , tax deferred variable annuity is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . ;
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
Axa home insurance , I believe , is available in Great Britain . It appears to be a reputable company but I am not familiar with companies in Europe . While it is true that I have a great British accent , which is popular at gatherings with folks from England , I am tot well-versed regarding their insurers .
The John Hancock Insurance Company is an A + AM Best rated insurance company that sells Annuities . They offer Variable Annuities and Fixed Annuities . They have a website that is dedicated to their Annuities . You can view them at WEBSITELINK . The website has basic information regarding their Annuities . You should check in with your independent agent to see if they are a good fit for your portfolio .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
As Ed Harris said above there are MANY different types of Life Insurance . It is true that there are two basic ` categories ' , which are Term and Permanent , but within those categories there are many different solutions or types of life insurance . For instance , Credit Life is a form of Term insurance which insures a creditor against the death of the debtor . Term insurance is basically `` death insurance '' . It has no cash value and no `` living benefits '' unless it has an ` accelerated benefit rider ' , which pays out or `` accelerates '' a portion of the death benefit in the case of critical or chronic illness . The ` Permanent ' category includes ` Universal ' and Whole Life - which is the only truly permanent type of life insurance . Within these categories there are many types again . There are buy-sell agreements and Key-Man policies designed specifically for businesses . There are variable and indexed policies , which are tied to the stock market or to specific stock indexes . There are `` participating '' and `` non-participating '' policies , which refers to the paying of dividends into the cash value of policies . There are Individual , First to die and Last to die policies . For more information contact an experienced Insurance Adviser / Broker . If in Hawaii I will be happy to help you .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Does An Insurance Deductible Mean In Health Insurance ?
It is the out of pocket medical expenses that a individual must pay before their insurance `` kicks in '' with your policies definition of full coverage . Generally medical expenses relating to preventive and early detection will be covered before meeting the deductible . The co-pays and co-insurance would be credited toward your deductible . It is the same basic principle as a deductible with car insurance .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
What does it mean to have a health insurance deductible ? A deductible reflects the amount that you are willing to self insure on your health plan . The deductible is the first part of a health insurance bill when it comes . That portion is on the insured to pay . The next phase is co-insurance where you and the insurance company split the bill .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
HDHP stands for High Deductible Health Plan . Generally , this term has been used in association with a type of health insurance policy purchased that was specifically designed to be used with a Health Savings Account -LRB- H.S.A -RRB- . In this context the health insurance plan design has an upfront deductible that must be paid by the policyholder before any co-insurance cost sharing and/or copayments can be applied to the policy 's coverage . The IRS determines the minimum deductible and out-of-pocket maximums for H.S.A eligible high deductible health plans each year . For this reason the deductible associated with HDHPs changes over time . In 2014 the minimum individual deductible for a HDHP is $ 1250 , in 2015 it will increase to $ 1300 . Re-designs of health insurance plan benefits prompted by the Affordable Care Act have introduced new health insurance plans that have substantially higher deductibles that previously were most often associated with an H.S.A based plans . As such , the consumer must closely examine the detailed benefits summary of the health insurance plans they are considering . This is because there are plan designs now that certainly have a high deductible but they also have other benefit features like office visit or prescription copayments that disqualify them from being used with an H.S.A. . In short , you will be best served to seek out the services of a health insurance broker who is knowledgeable in these matters .
A higher deductible will decrease the premium you will pay for the auto insurance , but that does n't necessarily mean it is better . A higher deductible also means you will pay more out of pocket if you are involved in an accident . The decision of higher deductible vs. higher premium is one that should be based on what you can pay in case of an accident , and not necessarily what the monthly payment will be , but that is a discussion you should certainly have to determine which option is better for you .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
A tough question to answer because it is so subjective , what 's high to one person may quite acceptable to another . As 30 year insurance industry professional I would say that by the standards of 2014 , you are entering `` high deductible '' territory when your plan 's annual deductible exceeds $ 2000 for an individual . When many consumers hear the term high deductible it is often being used as another way of saying this is a health insurance plan designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . The model for this product being that the lower premiums for a high deductible health insurance plan with no copayment features will free up money to fund an HSA and hopefullyaccumulate a health care nest egg for a person 's retirement years . In 2014 the minimum deductible for an HSA based plan is $ 1250 and the maximum deductible is $ 6350 . With the advent of the Affordable Care Act 's -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- health insurance marketplaces in 2014 the consumer is now presented with a whole new array of health insurance plan designs that will certainly meet anyone 's definition of a high deductible plan but that may not be designed to be compatible with an HSA . Extra care and caution needs to be exercised by the consumer in the new world of health insurance and I would recommend seeking out the services of an experienced health insurance brokers in your marketplace to help you find the plan best suited to your needs and budget .
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
A deductible simply means that you have to pay for some of the losses before your insurance company will pay anything . Unfortunately in health insurance deductibles are more complex than in auto or homeowners insurance . The deductible is the amount of money you 'll have to pay out of pocket during a calendar year before the policy will start paying . If you have a $ 1,000 deductible your insurance company wo n't cover the first $ 1,000 of health expenditures you have in a calendar year . Once you meet your deductible for the year , they will pay a large percentage of the losses over the deductible .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Some people use the term `` stop loss '' to mean `` maximum out-of-pocket exposures '' which is the point in a person 's health insurance policy when they 've met their deductible and any co-insurance cost sharing and the health insurance carrier becomes 100 % responsible for all health care costs after that point . Technically this is an incorrect use of the term . Stop loss traditionally refers to reinsurance arrangements within self-insured group health insurance plans . There are two types of stop loss insurance , specific and aggregate . Specific stop loss insurance protects the group plan from claims exposure above a certain point for any insured person in the group . For example , a $ 50,000 specific stop loss policy means the employer accepts the risk for the first $ 50,000 in claims on an individual and after that point the reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost . Aggregate stop loss insurance protects the employer from claims liability for the entire insured group above a certain point . A $ 1 million aggregate stop loss policy means the employer accepts the liability for the first $ 1 million in claims for their entire insured group , if the group 's claims exceed this limit then the aggregate reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
Think of the deductible as a form of self insurance . In other words , the portion you 'll pay before insurance begins to pay on claims . Health plans usually offer a choice of deductibles have a lower premium cost if you choose a higher deductible . A higher deductilbe means you accept more cost upfront for the use of a health plan in order to receive a lower premium cost . After the deductible has been met , usually you go into a phase called `` co-insurance '' . Co-insurance is the phase where you and the insurance company split the bill for care . A co-insurance level may be 50-50 , 60-40 , 70-30 or other combinations depending on your plan . For example if you had a plan with a 80/20 coinsurance provison and a $ 500 deductible and a bill for $ 2500 for a service . How it would be split up is as follows . The first $ 500 of the bill is yours . Of the remaining $ 2000 , the insurance company pays $ 1600 towards the bill and you have an additional $ 400 . Please note : once you 've met your deductible for the year , you will no longer be charged it for claims , Co-insurance would be next . Then once you 've met your co-insurance limits , your claims for the balance of the year -LRB- not counting copays -RRB- are covered at 100 % .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Was The First State To Provide Disability Insurance ?
Rhode Island was first , followed by California , then New Jersey , and then New York . Years later , Puerto Rico joined the ranks , and Hawaii was the last state to provide Disability Insurance . They all use slightly different methods , but all provide temporary disability benefits through the use of tax dollars .
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Do you need private disability if I have group disability ? Depends . If you have group first , individual -LRB- private -RRB- disability will be limited as most plans only allow 60-70 % income replacement from all sources . Group usually covers 50-60 % of income . It will also most likely be taxable income so you have to decide how long you can get by on anywhere from 35-50 % of your total income . Where individual disability would step in is to fill that income gap . This is the reason I answered `` depends '' . It is what do you want , what the contracts actually say and what you can afford ? One thing to consider if you are new to the workplace is to get your individual disability first . You can protect 100 % of your income or even greater if your individual is in place before group .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
State Farm lists three types of Disability Insurance on their website : Disability Income Insurance , Mortgage Disability Income Insurance , and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance . The Disability Income Insurance provides payments to the insured during a period of disability so that they can pay for an incurred expenses . State Farm also sells Group Long Term Disability Insurance .
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
State disability insurance is a government mandated program that many people mistakenly believe they have , but do n't . Only five states require private workers to participate in a short term disability program : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . Forty five states do not have mandated state short term disability . Social Security Disability Insurance is managed at the state level , but is a federally funded program . Temporary disabilities are not covered .
The State Departments of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- regulate and oversee long-term care insurance sold and administered in each state . The General Accounting Office of the federal government -LRB- GAO -RRB- works in concert with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- to monitor the activities of the State DOI , and audit their work as it relates to payment of claims by individual insurance carriers , rate changes and approvals , and sales practices . In 2008 , the GAO released a report `` State Oversight of Rate Setting and Claims Settlement Practices '' involving 10 sample states on the topicand reported the following : `` Regulators in the 10 states GAO reviewed oversee claims settlement practices by monitoring consumer complaints and conducting examinations in an effort to ensure that companies are complying with standards . Claims settlement standards in these states largely focus on timely investigation and payment of claims and prompt communication with consumers , but the standards adopted and how states define timeliness vary notably across the states . Regulators told GAO that reviewing consumer complaints is one of the primary methods for monitoring companies compliance with state standards . In addition to monitoring complaints , these regulators also said that they use examinations of company practices to identify any violations in standards that may require further action . Finally , state regulators in 6 of the 10 states in GAOs review reported that their states are considering additional protections related to claims settlement . For example , regulators in several states said that their states were considering an independent review process for consumers appealing claims denials . Such an addition may be useful as some regulators said that they lack authority to resolve complaints where , for example , the company and consumer disagree on a factual matter , such as a consumers eligibility for benefits . '' Each state has a DOI website which includes a subsection on long-term care insurance sold in that state . Their Internet addresses are usually something like www.insurance . -LSB- abbreviation of state , like ` AZ ' -RSB- . gov.They can also be googled '' -LSB- Name of state -RSB- State Department of Insurance '' .
What kind of retirement plan is TRS ? A quick search reveals that TRS is short for teachers retirement system . These are state sponsored plans set up to provide retirement benefits for public school educators in their respective states . The plans themselves may be different in each state as well as different within each state as plans are altered at times for new hires . For example in my state there are currently three plans in action for the teachers retirement . The first was closed to new hires in 1977 and has about a 1000 teachers still working . The second was closed about a decade ago and is very different from the first and the third is still different from 1 or 2 . I expect a fourth to be introduced in the next 5 years .
State Farm does have Disability Insurance that it offers for purchase . Their plans include regular Disability Insurance that pays a benefit to the disabled person to be used as they wish , which State Farm calls Disability Income Insurance . State Farm also offers Mortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance .
The states that require Short Term Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York and Rhode Island . A few states offer disability to low income citizens in others ways . California , New Jersey and Rhode Island offer state Disability Insurance or Temporary State Disability Insurance . Puerto Rico also offers a Public Temporary Disability Insurance plan .
There are many factors that affect the policy premium pricing . Therefore , more questions than answers ... initially ... First of all , what State are we talking about , since rates vary greatly from State to State , not to mention significant regional variations within a State ? For one example , think of a coastal location exposure to wind vs. a dwelling located inland and not generally exposed to the same potential perils . Which one is going to present the highest chance of risk for wind damage losses ? This will definitely affect the premium . Additionally , one insurance company 's rates can vary greatly from those of another . Also , a few of the many other questions : What is the amount of intended insurance needed on the dwelling ? How old is the home ? What type of construction ? What type of fire protection and proximity to the dwelling ? What other types of protection devices and method of monitoring ? Any dangerous animal breeds ? Swimming pool ? You really need to talk to an agent about rates in your location . Ask for quotes from the strongest carriers . Ask particularly about their financial strengths and claims paying histories . Try to get carriers with A.M Best ratings of A or better , if at all possible . Additionally , many State Insurance Departments have consumer information for the public , relating to homeowner polices . Do some of your own ` on-line ' research , if possible . You can also ask other homeowners in your area about their carriers ' pricing and experiences with claims .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best answer that I was able to locate is fromaskdeb.com . Here it is : Car insurance polices actually evolved from maritime insurance hundreds of years earlier . The policies were to cover any losses and damages that might occur to property that was transported by ship . When the automobile was invented , these marine policies acted as a blueprint for car insurance . The first car insurance policy offered only liability coverage to protect any property that might be damaged by a motor vehicle . This first policy was written by an English insurance company back in 1895 . In the U.S. , the first liability car insurance policy was not written until 1898 and the first policy holder was a Dr. Truman J. Martin . It wasnt until 1927 that Massachusetts became the first state in the U.S. to pass the first mandatory insurance law .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Does Disability Insurance Protect You ?
How does Disability Insurance protect you ? By protecting your INCOME . Unless we are fortunate enough to have a partner who makes enough to support our lifestyles , most of us would undergo substantial hardship by losing our source of income due to a disability . Even short term disabilities can quickly deplete the reserves some of us have stashed away for emergencies . Long Term or permanent disabilities can be devastating to even high income earners . Having Disability Insurance does not provide you with 100 % of your original salary , but can replace approx 70 % of it so that you at least have some time to regroup and evaluate your employment and lifestyle situation . It may be possible to live on 70 % of your income , even indefinitely . It is not possible to live with no income at all . That is the protection Disability Insurance provides .
Disability Insurance Protect You in the event that you are injured or become sick to the extent that you can no longer perform your work duties . In reality , disability insurance is paycheck protection . Social Security disability benefits can help , but not significantly . Employer sponsored group benefits may have short term disability that can supplement your cash reserves or your emergency money . Disability insurance can protect up to 60 % of your compensation with tax free benefits . If you qualify as a business , you may be able to deductible the premium cost and cover up to 80 % of your compensation , but taxable .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
How does Disability Insurance protect you ? By protecting your INCOME . Unless we are fortunate enough to have a partner who makes enough to support our lifestyles , most of us would undergo substantial hardship by losing our source of income due to a disability . Even short term disabilities can quickly deplete the reserves some of us have stashed away for emergencies . Long Term or permanent disabilities can be devastating to even high income earners . Having Disability Insurance does not provide you with 100 % of your original salary , but can replace approx 70 % of it so that you at least have some time to regroup and evaluate your employment and lifestyle situation . It may be possible to live on 70 % of your income , even indefinitely . It is not possible to live with no income at all . That is the protection Disability Insurance provides .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is disability insurance worth having ? The answer depends on the individual . What we 're talking about with disability insurance is paycheck protection . Disability insurance does n't pay for a medical claim , at least not directly . Disability insurance simply creates a pot of money to use as you would with your paycheck . It is up to the individual to decide the worth of protecting their paycheck . Maybe if there 's passive income or massive savings the need for disability insurance may not be that great . But , if you 're not in that position financially , you should think long and hard about disability insurance .
How important is disability insurance ? It 's going to depend on your situation . Since Disabiliyt Insurance is paycheck protection , the first thing you have to ask `` is my paycheck worth protecting with disability insurance ? '' Maybe you have passive income or considerable savings that may reduce the the need for disability coverage ? Maybe you are just shy of retirement ? I guess the importence of Disability Insurance to the individual is going to be in proportion to how long that person can go without a paycheck ? Answering that question usually establishes your waiting period for most people for the policy they are considering .
Disability Income Insurance , also known as `` Paycheck Protection , '' does just that -- it protects your paycheck ! If you can no longer work due to sickness or an injury , it will pay a portion of your income each month for a pre-determined amount of time . We 're quick to protect our homes , our health and our lives , but we forget how easily we could become disabled !
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
How to choose disability insurance ? Well , first thing you check before rates and dollars paid out is the `` definition '' of disability . This is the only thing that matters as if you do not meet the definition of disability the policy will not pay out . The next is how long does the duration of the definition of disability last ? Is it different durations for different disabilities ? A policy is only as good as the definitions it pays from . Words are so very important with disability insurance . Unlike life insurance where death pretty much determines the payout , disability has to meet a definition within the policy to be paid out .
Disability Insurance protects your income during times of being disabled . Short Term Disability covers injuries and illnesses with a fairly short recovery time , normally a few months . Long Term Disability covers longer periods of disability , up to retirement age . How long the policy pays , and whether it only pays for full disability or also when unable to work full time , depends on features chosen in the policy . You can also pick how much of your paycheck you want to replace , up to a limit .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
I agree with the coverage part of answer one , however , if your renters insurance is only $ 10 a month I would question how much coverage you are actually getting . Why pay for something that will not protect you when something actually does happen ? Questions to ask your agent are : what they are basing their recommended coverage amount on ; if your property is covered only if it is inside your home -LRB- some companies offer world wide protection - if you 're on vacation and the airline loses your luggage for instance -RRB- ; how any valuable items such as jewelry or art , are protected - they should be scheduled on your renters policy otherwise they are only protected up to certain limits . And yes definitely look into bundling renters and auto for an additional discount !
Disability Insurance Protect You in the event that you are injured or become sick to the extent that you can no longer perform your work duties . In reality , disability insurance is paycheck protection . Social Security disability benefits can help , but not significantly . Employer sponsored group benefits may have short term disability that can supplement your cash reserves or your emergency money . Disability insurance can protect up to 60 % of your compensation with tax free benefits . If you qualify as a business , you may be able to deductible the premium cost and cover up to 80 % of your compensation , but taxable .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Great question ! You certainly can have more than one disability insurance policy . Most commonly this occurs when a person has a group long term disability coverage plan and it does not fully meet or cover their income needs if they were to become disabled . In those cases individuals want to protect themselves and their family against a catastrophic loss of income in the case of disability . So , they will often supplement a group plan with one or more individual disability policies to more fully protect their income .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover TV Damage ?
It may if the damage was caused by a covered peril within your policy . Some of the perils typically covered under a homeowners policy are fire , smoke , explosion , wind . If you want to know what is covered , I would recommend that you read your policy completely for coverage and exclusion information or call your local agent and them tell you what is covered or excluded .
There is really only 1 renters policy . However , the coverage included can vary . Some policies are written on an Actual Cash Value basis , where other policies are written on a Full Content Replacement basis . Let me explain the difference . Let 's say you went out and bought a brand new TV that cost you $ 1000 today . Three years from now , it gets damaged and you submit a claim under your Renters policy . On the Actual Cash Value policy , the claim adjuster would look up the make and model of your TV , and find that it is no longer selling for $ 1000 . That model now sells for $ 400 . But the $ 400 would be for a brand now unit out of the box , where your TV was 3 years old , so they further reduce the claim based on depreciation . You 're left with $ 250 - and you still need to pay your $ 100 deductible . Not a good day . With Full Contents Replacement coverage , the claims adjuster looks at how much you spent on the TV , not the make and model , and your claim is processed for $ 1000 -LRB- minus your $ 100 deductible -RRB- . And since technology has improved over the past three years , you now have the choice to purchase the same TV you had -LRB- which is selling for only $ 400 now remember ? -RRB- or purchase a better TV with better features than the one that was damaged . Not a bad day at all ! Although the Actual Cash Value policy will cost less , you wind up getting less in the end . Remember , just because one policy is cheaper than another , does n't mean it 's a better deal . Always consult with a licensed , professional insurance agent to help determine which policy is best for your needs .
There are two methods of calculating the value of loss items in insurance : Replacement Cost Value -LRB- or RCV -RRB- , and Actual Cash Value -LRB- or ACV -RRB- . Depreciation is used to calculate ACV . With RCV , you are only concerned with the replacement cost of the loss items . For example , ifI purchased a 32 inch flat screen TV 5 years ago , I might have paid $ 900 for the TV . But tobuy that exact same TV now might only cost $ 200 . So , I would get RPV of $ 200 , because that is the cost to replace my loss item . -LRB- This could also work the other way . If that exact same TV now is $ 1,200 , I would get that amount instead -RRB- . With ACV , we use depreciation to determine the actual cash value of the loss item . So with my $ 900 TV that I bought 5 years ago , each year that I 've owned the item its ` valuewill be less . Eventually , my TV will only beworth the amount I could get to scrap it . After 5 years , that TV is only worth $ 50 , because the actual value of that TV has depreciated .
Your homeowner 's policy would cover your `` food '' the same way it would cover your couch or TV . The problem is if you have a standard homeowner 's policy , only damage caused by specific named perils ; Fire , Theft , Wind , etc. would be covered . Coverage on your personal property , furniture , clothing , dishes and yes food , should be the same as the coverage on your home . `` Any direct damage '' should be covered . Now all policies will have deductibles and specific limitations or exclusions butit will make it a lot easier to understand what you are or are not covered for . If your insurer does n't offer this `` Special Coverage '' on personal property or charges you a significant premium for it , you may want to consider another insurer .
How did it break ? If it is just old -LRB- or even new for that matter -RRB- and the thing simply quite working ... NO . did a tornado rip your roof off and wind blow the TV off the stand and destroy it - probably . Did a theif drop it on their way out - maybe . Lightning strike your house and fry the TV - call your agent . I 'm joking around , but most all homeowners policies to not extend coverage to TV , appliances , etc. that simply break . There must be a covered claim situation that caused the damage for your policy to come into play . Call your local indpendent agent and dsicuss your specific situation to find out how your policy might handle things .
A broken TV Screen would be covered by home owner insurance only in the event of a covered loss such as burglary , fire , hail , or wind . Otherwise , the broken tv screen is not a covered repair to be filed on a homeowner 's policy . Most home owner policies have at least a $ 500 deductible . therefore , in the event it is covered , you may want to find out the cost of the repair before making a claim on your insurance .
Renters Insurance is not designed to cover damage to property such as real estate . It will cover your property inside the apartment or home you are renting . Be sure to look at the type of coverage you are getting as well ; current value v. replacement value . In other words , if your TV is damaged , would you want what it is currently valued at or what it takes to get a new TV ?
This information is based on knowledge on the most basic level : Yes you do . Typically in insurance , if you do n't own something , you ca n't insure it . So for example if each of you have a TV in their bedrooms , and a fire destroys the TVs , one person 's insurance may not claim all 3 TVs because he did not own all 3 TVs . You may typically only insure what you own based on Michigan insurance guidelines .
Let me add a few comments here on how the coverages are usually presented on a Declaration page of a Homeowners policy . First there is the party being insured and who the company is that is providing the insurance . Then there is a specific term for the coverage to begin and end . Then there are many ways to then itemize the coverage , but here are some basics . The policy is usually divided into two Sections . Section I deals with property insurance and Section II Liability Insurance , so within the section I coverages there are usually four parts Coverages A , B , C , D. Coverage A is the Dwelling Coverage . This can be sold on an Actual cash value basis -LRB- very infrequently , but watch out for it -RRB- usually on a 100 % of the dollar value of the estimated cost to replace the house itself . This is often difficult for consumers to understand , but no one really cares about the market value . What is important is the replacement cost and replacing one house destroyed is usually a lot more expensive then building one new in a subdivision . Make sure you have enough coverage . This is not an exact science so many companies offer extensions to increase the coverage beyond the stated value . Next is Coverage B : These are the other structures appurtenant , outbuildings , fences , Gazebos unattached garages etc. . Coverage C is usually Personal Property or Contents Coverage . This is very important to understand : You want replacement cost coverage not Actual Cash Value , ACV . The easiest way to think of this is the ten your old large and 200 lb TV . The ACV is going to be next to nothing . There is no continuing interest in buying that type TV anywhere . But replacing it with a new TV with light weight plasma features is what you want . Coverage D is Additional Living Expense . This can be stated two different ways or a mixture of the two . Some companies list a maximum dollar limit available . Others list a maximum time limit and still others list a maximum time limit and dollar limit . This covers the additional cost of living elsewhere while your home is reconstructed . It can also come into play if a Governmental authority wo n't let you near your home for safety reasons -LRB- i.e. forced evacuation form an impending hurricane -RRB- . This coverage does not pick up the cost of things you would normally pay out of pocket , but the additional things and costs necessary to keep your household going while your home is repaired . The next set of coverages comprise Section II or liability coverage . Coverage E is very broad and covers such things as an injury to a child by your dog , or an inadvertent collapse of you deck with guests on it etc. . Coverage E then is is sold in increments of 100,000 usually . The difference in price from say 300,000 to 500,000 is usually only a few dollars a year . If you have an umbrella policy , you may be required to carry a minimum of 500,000 in coverage . Coverage F is Medical payments coverage . This is usually quite nominal and is used to cover minor incidents where fault may not be much of an issue , but you feel obliged to pay for the medical bill . For example a neighbor picks up your mail for you while you are gone and trips on your garden hose . The injuries are not serious , but do require a couple stitches . The limit is low because the much more serious incidents would require negligence or absolute liability and would fall under Coverage E. I hope this helps . If you are in AZ.CA , TX , MO , or GA we 'll be glad to assist you with placing your homeowners coverage .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Your TV would only be covered for named perils in your policy . Things like Fire , Lightning , Wind , Theft and other natural perils . As a rule accidental damage would not be covered . Keep in mind too that your renters insurance has a deductible , so if your deductible is close to the cost of replacing the TV then it may not be to your advantage to turn in a claim anyway .
Renters insurance should be enough to cover all of the contents that you own in a rental property . If you are renting a small studio versus an entire house , the amounts should be very different . A rule of thumb that has been taught to me was to use $ 10,000 per room rented . Also , check with your insurance company to find out what the minimum coverage is to have replacement cost . Without replacement cost , you will only receive depreciated value in the event of a loss . So that new TV you bought three years ago will be worth much less today . You would rather have the replacement of a new TV for an older TV . You should also include some sort of liability coverage when purchasing your renters coverage .
While you would want to check your policy , the general answer is yes . Homeowners policies cover such things as lightening , wind , hail , fire , and a host of other perils . So if lightening come in and destroys your TV , in most cases that would be a covered peril . Check with your insurance agent to find out what your Homeowners Policy covers .
This is indeed an interesting question . The late Tom Bosley , who played Howard Cunningham on the TV show hit `` Happy Days , '' died in 2010 . So I guess he is not covered . Or were you referring to Bosley Medical Centers ? Since they are hair restoration and growth treatment centers , health insurance would not cover expenses . Of course , perhaps you were referring to John Bosley , a fictional character in the old Charlie 's Angels TV series . Since he really did n't exist , he would not be covered .
That depends on how the tv ended up being broken . If the tv was broken due to a covered loss then it may be covered . Please read your policy completely to know what coverage is offered and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Great question ! Most folks know the importance of homeowners insurance , but few people realize all of the benefits and coverage available with a renter 's insurance policy . Coverage options differ between insurance companies , but here is a quick list of items that are typically covered : 1 . It covers replacing all of your belongings , including furniture , clothes , shoes , tools , laptops , and TVs after a covered loss . -LRB- Many people incorrectly assume that if they are renting , their personal belongings are covered under the property owner 's insurance policy ; in most cases the renter 's belongings are not covered under the owner 's policy . -RRB- 2 . It covers medical costs for guests who may be injured in your home . -LRB- Perhaps the neighbor sprained their ankle falling off of your step ? Wouldnt it be nice to cover their medical expenses as a courtesy , and not have to pay out of your own pocket ? -RRB- 3 . It gives you liability protection for events you may be held liable for on or off the property . -LRB- Maybe the neighbor who sprained their ankle decides to sue you ? -RRB- 4 . It covers additional living expenses , such as a hotel room , and dining out in the event you are temporarily evacuated from your home . -LRB- Perhaps a pipe bursts , and the landlord says you have to stay somewhere else for 10 days while they conduct repairs ? -RRB-
Renter 's insurance is important for two reasons . First , it covers your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio system , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- against loss . Second , it provides liability coverage . Let 's suppose you were cooking and a fire began because your attention was directed away . The fire that caused the damage was your fault , because you were negligent . The damage to the home or apartment you were renting may be more than what everything you own . In a recent case where the tenant did not have renter 's insurance , the cost of the damageswas recovered by garnishing the tenant 's wages by 30 % until the entire cost of the damages was recovered .
The property coverage you are afforded under renter 's coverage is for your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio systems , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- , but typically not for the building . If you are asking if your own personal property would be covered if a hurricane caused the damaged , then , yes , your personal property would be covered . However , there is one caveat ... if it was wind that was determined as the cause of loss . Hurricanes can cause damage not only by wind , but by flooding . If flooding -LRB- waters rising from outside -RRB- was the cause of loss , you may not be covered , because flood is typically excluded . You could possibly purchase flood coverage in this case .
Some carriers do have this type of coverage . Depending on the damage . The structure usually is covered but your electronics that might of been damaged because the lightning surge fried your tv computers and ect may not be covered . That would fall under equipment breakdown coverage . many carriers offer this and or have it included in the policy . It is very important to read through your policy there are some that have exclusions for this type of coverage . I recommend you talk to your agent or carrier direct to see what is the definitions that are in your policy your agent should of explained your coverage 's . Hope this helps
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Why Should You Plan For Retirement ?
Actually there arent a lot of people who do plan for retirement . Retirement is coming whether you plan for it or not . Many people , through lack of planning , can not afford to retire so they work until they can not work any longer . Rather than enjoying their golden years , they struggle to stay gainfully employed when the market place doesnt value them very much . Finally , they become dependent . They must depend on relatives or the state . No , you dont need to plan ; you can be overwhelmed by it later .
Retirement can thought of as a time of change . It is more than your job and paycheck stopping or the selling of your company . Retirement It is a event or at the very least transition . What happens if you do not plan and simply fly by the seat of your pants ? You probably will have income problems or end up paying more tax because of the lack of planning . There is of course the non monetary side . What are you going to do with the rest of you life after `` retirement ? . No plan then you may not like how things turn out . If you have more questions you can contact me . Start with my web site www.jpw.ca if you prefer .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
A tax deferred Retirement Plan is a plan that allow the grow to accumulate tax free while it is inside the plan and taxed when it is withdrawn . This tax deferred growth provides a significant advantage over plans that are taxed each year . Why ? Because you get the full effect of compound interest . In Canada , a Registered Retirement Savings Plan RRSP -RRB- not only offers tax deferred growth , it also offers -LRB- subject to limits -RRB- tax deductibility of contributions . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How much can I borrow from my retirement plan ? Now if I could flick your ear like your dad used to do , I would say `` why would you want to ? '' Just because a loan provision can be included within your plan , it does n't mean you should exhaust EVERY other possibility first . Borrowing from your retirement plan is far and away the last possible choice to make . That said ... The limits for loans can be set by your plan . Borrowing provisions can be set up by your plan . Payback interest rate is set up by your plan . Your plan advisory board will decide if a loan request has merits . Usually the money you take from your plan is no longer participating in plan returns , so if you 're investment is earning 10 % and your loan payback provision is 4 % , you 're making 4 % on your money . If you get laid off or quit your job , your loan from your retirement plan is `` called '' immediately . Failure to pay it back when called results in a `` premature distribution '' which makes your `` loan '' income , along with a penalty , so your income taxes could change considerably . Try to remember just because a feature is available , does n't mean you should use it .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
I should preface this by saying you should explore alternatives before you do surrender a retirement plan since in addition to lost savings there are tax consequences . In Canada , whether you can cash in you retirement plan depends on what type of plan you have . Individual Registered Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- can be surrendered . Group Pension Plans can not be surrendered while you are part of the plan . When you leave the plan whether you can access funds or are required to transfer to a locked in RRSP depends on a number of factors . It depends . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Old Do You Have To Be To Receive Medicare ?
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! Medicare was created to allow Senior citizens the opportunity to receive affordable health care at a time when that was difficult to get . The age for being able to apply for Medicare was set at 65 . Most people will enroll in the 6 month span that goes from 3 months prior to your 65th , to 3 months after . You can retire and start Social Security early , but Medicare wo n't kick in until your 65th . Thanks for asking !
If you have your last annual statement review the surrender and/or cash value account and death benefit . If you do n't have a statement , contact the company 's costumer service for an in force ledger . Depending upon the type of cash value life insurance you have and how old it is , it may contain higher credited interest rates . That could be a reason to keep it . And depending upon how old you are , you may receive more money from the life settlement than the cash surrender value .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
There is no one replacement rule in life insurance , but there are some replacement guidelines and explanations . Here are a few : 1 -RRB- If you replace a policy , you should understand what you are giving up in your old policy and/or gaining in your new policy . 2 -RRB- Whether or not you make the replacement is up to you to do . The insurance company for your new policy does not have the authority to terminate your old policy . The only time it might do so is if the new policy is with the same company as your old policy was , and you had explicitly stated that you wanted to replace your old policy with the new one . 3 -RRB- If you are keeping your old policy , you must be financially qualified to have the total amount of life insurance that you have now AND are applying for . 4 -RRB- In New York the replacement paperwork must be processed before the new life insurance application can be taken .
Life insurance rates for smokers may be less expensive than you realize ! Of course , as experienced brokers , our job is to shop , compare and find the lowest prices with the help of our top-rated websites and modern software . Nicotine use is one of the underwriting factors considered when determining rates . However , other factors , such as use of medications , existing conditions and height/weight will also factor in the determination of prices . A few general estimates from top-rated companies : -LRB- Rates are monthly for a healthy smoker...10-year guarantee -RRB- : $ 39 - $ 250,000 40 year old male $ 19 - $ 100,000 40 year old male $ 33 - $ 250,000 40 year old female $ 60 - $ 500,000 40 year old female $ 29 - $ 250,000 30 year old male ALSO ... $ 109.86 - $ 500,000 40 year old male 20-year guarantee
When buying Disability insurance you need to consider how many years you want it to last , how many months you want to wait from incurring the disability until you receive the first payment -LRB- elimination period -RRB- , and how much of your income you want to replace . You need to consider features like whether it will pay if you are able to go back to work but not are not back up to your old wages -LRB- residual disability -RRB- , whether it will pay if you can not perform your own occupation , and whether it has a cost of living rider . Finally , you need to consider your budget and how much of the above you can afford , then pick out the features that are most important to you .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Traditioanlly , If you canceled a permanent life insurance policy , the carrier would need you to either sign paperwork acknowledging you want to terminate the coverage or they record the phone call -LRB- think of the latter as like a voice signature -RRB- . If there is cash value inside a permanent life policy and the policy is canceled , you are cashing it out -LRB- less any surrender charges or outstanding loans against the policy , if applicable -RRB- . Did he receive a check for any cash value or did the carrier indicate they were sending monies ? How old was the policy and what age was he when he took it out ? If all routes to put the old policy back in force are exhausted , then you may want to look at an alternative course of action . An option to consider to secure new coverage is to use the monies received from the cashed out whole life policy to put towards the premiums for a new policy to substantially reduce the premiums that would be needed for the coverage . If he is much older , then you may want to consider a Guaranteed Universal Life policy instead of a whole life policy . Guaranteed universal life minimizes the cash value buildup to minimize the dollar spent per $ 1,000 of coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Does a 60 year old need life insurance ? To answer this question a person must find a 60 year old and ask do you need life insurance ? To get to that answer maybe a few others questions would be necessary to ask , such as ... Do you still have a mortgage ? are you married ? Do you have a pension and want to take the full benefit ? Does anybody in your family still depend on you ? Do you want your wife or your kids to suffer when you pass ? Did all your plans for retirement work out exactly as you 've planned ? Still a ton of questions to ask . Most of my business is based on 60 + year olds discovering they need life insurance .
Medicare kicks in two years -LRB- 24 months -RRB- after receiving Social Security Disability benefits . Of course , it will be a while after suffering the disability until SSDI is received . If you turn 65 years old before the two years are up , you can start receiving Medicare at age 65 .
The price of life insurance for a 40 year old depends on the health , tobacco use , weight , and gender of the applicant , in addition to how much life insurance is purchased and what type of policy is bought . Short term policies cost much less than permanent policies . Policies for smokers usually cost at least double the rate of policies for nonsmokers . Coverage for those with serious health conditions can cost 10 times or more of the premium for a 40 year old with perfect health . To get an estimate of a life insurance quote for a 40 year old with your characteristics , you can run a quote on an website advertising `` instant life insurance quotes '' . You can input different amounts and different types of policies to see how rates differ for different scenarios .
Withdrawing money from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- can be quite complicated and could be quite expensive . Since your employer has established the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the plan documents that govern your plan are in his office . The first thing to find out is whether in service withdrawals are allowed by the plan . Often there will be allowed withdrawals but the withdrawal must meet certain conditions . It is important to determine if you have the right to withdraw money from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- if you are still an employee . The rules also change if you leave your employer , whether voluntarily or involuntarily . You will probably find that your access to the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is much greater if you have left your job . If your employer is contributing to your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- there is probably a vesting schedule that is a part of the plan documents . The vesting schedule tells you the percentage of the employers contribution that is actually yours . Normally these vesting schedules run out several years so money that is received by the account may not actually be yours for a number of years . Your deposits will remain yours . These are the employers contributions that have a vesting schedule . If the money in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- has been deferred from current income tax you will be responsible to pay income tax as ordinary income in the year that you receive the money . If the money is in a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the withdrawal will be treated as a return of your contribution until you exhaust you basis -LRB- the total amount that you contributed . -RRB- The next major issue is your age . The rules vary a great deal if you are younger than fifty-nine and a half years old . If money can be withdrawn from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and you are younger than fifty-nine and a half years old you will be subject . Generally speaking withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- prior to age fifty-nine and a half are also treated to a special penalty tax of ten per cent . This is changed in addition to the ordinary income tax on the distribution . You can not avoid paying income tax on the money received but there are ways to avoid paying the ten per cent penalty tax . There are several general reasons . The first reason is if the amount is being withdrawn because the participant has died . A beneficiary will receive all of the distributions of the inherited 401 -LRB- k -RRB- free of the penalty tax . This can become complicated if the beneficiary is a spouse , please see a retirement income adviser or competent tax advisor prior to finalizing a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to a spouse . Another circumstance under which money can be taken from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- without paying the penalty tax is if the money is need due to the disability of the participant . This can also be true if money is needed to pay deductible medial expense . There is also a method of withdrawing money that can avoid the penalty tax . This can be quite complicated but the gist is to take the money in substantially equal period payments . If you think about a retirement annuity you will understand this concept . The payments should be designed to cover the lifetime of the participant . It is necessary for the participant to leave employment to use this technique . The computations for these payments are complicated but there are advisors who can help you should this be necessary . It is important to note that the penalty tax is only applicable until you reach age fifty-nine and half and the payments under this plan do not need to be continued after that point . Other retirement programs have additional exceptions that are more liberal than a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- IRAs , SEPs and SIMPLEs allow a $ 10,000 exemption to first-time homebuyers -LRB- this means anyone who is purchasing a home and hasnt owned a home for two years . -RRB- These plays also provide exceptions for higher education expenses -LRB- these must be taken in the year they are incurred , not the year that they are paid . -RRB- These plans offer exceptions for health insurance premiums for the unemployed . There is also a special rule for participants who are separating from their company and are more than fifty-five years old . There are ways to avoid the penalty tax but this requires careful tax planning .
The correct plan for your business is determined by a number of factors . Here are some of them ; How many employees in the business ? How many employees are family ? Is the business profitable and do employees earn a good living ? Do the owners want a maximum contribution plan for themselves . Are there key employees besides the owners ? How old is the ownership and the employee population ? And there are more questions ; How profitable is the company and how long has it been profitable ? And so on . So whether you put in place a 401k , profit sharing plan or defined benefit plan , these questions need to be answered .
Of course , how much life insurance costs for a 20 year old depends on how much life insurance the 20 year old is purchasing , how long they want the premium to be locked in , whether they have any health problems , and if they want to purchase a policy that requires an exam or goes with a quick policy requiring no medical exam . For a very healthy nonsmoker at age 20 , who is purchasing $ 100,000 of 30 year level Term without having to take an exam , the price is about $ 25/month . This is much less if you take an exam .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately no , you can not simply buy into Medicare . To secure Medicare benefits , you must meet certain eligibility requirements . The most common way people qualify for Medicare is by turning 65 years old . Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- is premium-free for most individuals -LRB- if you did not secure 40 credits , you would be subject to a monthly premium up to $ 426 per month -RRB- . Medicare Part B -LRB- medical insurance -RRB- requires a monthly premium -LRB- starting point is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - can be higher for higher-income individuals -RRB- . The other way people qualify is if they 're under 65 and are receiving social security disability benefits -LRB- must have been receiving SS disability benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease . Once you have Part A & Part B established , many people look into adding a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan if they want to have prescription drug coverage .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does ROP Life Insurance Work ?
ROP life insurance works by providing life coverage for a certain number of years , then returning the premiums paid in if death has not occurred by the time the term ends . The ROP stands for `` Return of Premium '' . These policies start out at a higher price than regular Term , and unlike regular Term , the longer terms usually have lower premiums than those policies with shorter terms . Most will return part of the premiums if the policy is kept at least half of the term , then the amount you would receive increases each year . If you keep the policy for the full term , 100 % of the premium is usually refunded -LRB- usually , minus the cost of table ratings , flat extras , and riders -RRB- .
ROP means return of premium . If the insured survives to the end of the guarantee period , then you get your money back . If you terminate the coverage mid way , then you get some of the money back . A schedule is provided with the policy . Some people like this deal . Their thinking is , Life insurance is a great bargain only if you die . But if you outlive the policy , you will have spent money for nothing . So you should get your money back . I can see what they mean . Its kind of like wanting your cake and eating it too . That would certainly work for me . But it boils down to a question of what is the cost of having it both ways . First of all , you pay a much higher premium for the return of premium guarantee . That makes sense . After all , you are not only asking the carrier to guarantee your premium for a specified amount of years - you are asking them to guarantee your money back as well . You have to pay for that extra layer of insurance . Is the extra amount you pay competitive ? Depends . What if you are a savvy investor and know how to get some good value for your dollar ? If it was that important to you to recoup your life insurance expenses , you might be able to put a lot less into the right investment vehicle . Another point : the return of premium feature is available only with term insurance . The fact is , many people need permanent insurance . The good news is that you can have your cake and eat it too with this product as well ! You can take a universal life product and structure it to guarantee your premium for as long as you want , and at the same time give you a guaranteed cash value equal to your total outlay . The product is that flexible . And if you had the cash , you could do this with a single payment , as opposed to paying year after year . Best of all , you could plan on holding on to the policy for the rest of your life . Something to think about when you look at life insurance for a money back guarantee . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
Term Life Insurance does not have cash value , but if you get what is called Return of Premium Term -LRB- ROP Term -RRB- , it has a form of cash value . About midway through the term , depending on the policy , it will pay back some of the premiums paid in , IF you cancel the policy . By the end of the term , this type of policy will generally pay back all the premiums you paid in . Some negatives : This cash is not available unless you surrender the policy . If you are table rated , it may be that only the premiums up to standard are paid back to you . The price is substantially higher than regular Term Life Insurance . Some positives : If you bought regular Term Life and invested the extra you would have spent on ROP Term , it could take a return of over 5 % every year on the difference , to earn what you would get back , tax free , by keeping ROP Term to the end . Unlike regular Term , longer terms often cost less than shorter terms , with ROP Term . Finally , getting back all your premiums if you are still alive at the end of the term is a great way to have `` free '' coverage and then get back enough for a final expense fund when the term ends .
There is also a 20 -LRB- and 30 -RRB- year term policy that has a couple more built in options at the end of the term period . With most 20 yr term plans your only options are pay the huge increase in premium , convert to a higher priced plan , or just walk away and try to qualify for a new plan , health permitting . Most term plans have zero cash values . Another option is a term plan called Return Of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- . With ROP you may have an option to get all your premiums back at the end of the level period . Example would be an annual premium of $ 700 . would return $ 14,000.00 at the end of 20 years . Another important option with ROP Term would be a reduced paid up Life Insurance plan . Using the same example , instead of taking the $ 14,000 you take a $ 25,000.00 paid up policy , regardless of your health . The premium is higher for ROP , but would be much lower than regular term over the 20 year period . What is the right plan for you ? A good agent will show you the options .
No , life insurance does not have a payout at the end of the term unless `` ROP '' life insurance was purchased . ROP stands for `` return of premium '' . This type of policy charges a rate that is higher than normal life insurance , which the life insurance company invests . If you keep the policy long enough , they are able to return the premium due to their use of that money over the years .
ROP stands for Return of Premium in life insurance . It generally refers to term life insurance where you get back all the premiums you paid in if you keep the policy until the end of the term . After about half the term has passed , a portion of the premiums may be returned if the policy is dropped early . ROP policies usually cost substantially more than regular term policies . Unlike regular term , longer terms in ROP term usually cost less than the shorter terms , because the insurance company is able to hold onto the premiums longer before returning them .
No , Term Life Insurance does not fund a savings plan within the policy , like Whole and Universal Life Insurance do . The only type of term insurance that has any saving component is Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term . If you keep an ROP term policy at least half of the years of the term , it can return some of the premium if you drop the policy . If you keep the policy for the entire term , it can return all the premium you paid in .
A Return of Premium Life Insurance policy will pay back all the premiums you paid in if you are still alive when the years of the term are ended . E.g. if you took out a $ 250,000 thirty year term policy on your 40th birthday with an annual premium of $ 500 , on your 70th birthday you would get a tax free check for $ 15,000 -LRB- the policy may exclude paying back policy fees or other minor variations , but that is the gist of it -RRB- . You could keep the cash or may even be able to roll the $ 15,000 over into a single premium permanent policy with a higher value . In this example , you could have had a $ 250,000 term policy to cover a 30 year mortgage , and if you had passed in that 30 years , your house would have been paid off . But if you outlive the 30 year term , you still end up with a final expense fund or policy . Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- term often will pay back part of the premiums paid in if the policy is kept for a shorter period than the entire term , as well . The initial price for ROP Term is higher than for regular Term life insurance . And , contrary to the premiums for regular Term insurance -LRB- which are usually higher the longer the term -RRB- , ROP Term policies usually cost LESS the longer the term is . That is because the insurance company hangs onto your money longer and thus is able to return more to you after those years have passed .
Term Life Insurance does not have a surrender value unless it is ROP -LRB- Return of Premium -RRB- Term . ROP Term will pay back some of the premiums that you paid in if you surrender the policy after at least half the term has passed . If you keep the policy for the entire term , it will usually pay back all the premiums you paid in .
ReliaStar is a life insurance company under ING . ING-ReliaStar primarily focuses on ING 's term life insurance programs , TermSmart and ROP Endowment Term -LRB- ROP stands for Return of Premium -RRB- . The TermSmart programs will generally offer the lowest rates for ING 's term insurance programs . ING offers permanent life insurance programs are under their ING-Security Life Of Denver title .
Term life insurance does not have cash value , but if you purchase ROP -LRB- Return of Premium -RRB- Term , you will get cash back at the end of the term . ROP Term pays back a percent of what you paid in if you would cancel your policy at some point -LRB- you usually have to keep the policy at least half of the term to get anything back -RRB- . That amount increases , so that you would get a full refund of your premiums if you kept the policy until the term ended .
One type of term policy that does build cash value is ROP -LRB- Return of Premium -RRB- Term . Most ROP Term policies will pay back part of the premium you pay in , if you keep the policy past the halfway mark . If you survive and keep the policy to the end of the term , you get back all the premium you paid in . These policies start out at a higher premium than regular term insurance , but when the premium is returned , it is not taxable . So return of premium term life insurance can be a good way of getting death protection and a form of savings at the same time .
ROP life insurance works by providing life coverage for a certain number of years , then returning the premiums paid in if death has not occurred by the time the term ends . The ROP stands for `` Return of Premium '' . These policies start out at a higher price than regular Term , and unlike regular Term , the longer terms usually have lower premiums than those policies with shorter terms . Most will return part of the premiums if the policy is kept at least half of the term , then the amount you would receive increases each year . If you keep the policy for the full term , 100 % of the premium is usually refunded -LRB- usually , minus the cost of table ratings , flat extras , and riders -RRB- .
Life insurance that can be cashed out is life insurance with a cash value . This is Whole Life or Universal Life , although not every Whole or Universal Life policy has cash value at any given time . Term policies can only be cashed out if they are Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term . And you must wait until at least half the term has passed before you can get any cash when surrendering an ROP term policy .
This question is a bit vague however if you are an agent and looking for online solutions to sell life insurance that does not require any agent involvement , no medical including blood and urine , only simplified underwriting with 4 questions , then yes , there is an answer for you . This is just a simple 20 year term with Return of Premium built in . Right now , this is the lowest cost ROP as well compared to other ROP companies such as Transamerica , Mutual of Omaha , American General , etc. . Smoker and non-smoker rates available . All you have to do is drive prospects to your website you get . You will need to contact me direct to get more details on the company . Matt - -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498
No , Term Life Insurance does not have a cash surrender value , in most cases . Term insurance has a low cost up front because it does not have a cash value accumulation . ROP -LRB- Return Of Premium -RRB- Term costs more than regular Term Life Insurance , but does return the premiums paid in at the end of the Term if the Insured is still alive .
ROP life insurance stands for Return of Premium life insurance . ROP life insurance will return the premiums that you paid , if you hang onto the policy to the end of the term . Some policies will return part of the premiums if you keep the policy a certain number of years -LRB- usually at least half the term length -RRB- . If death occurs before the term ends , the policy pays the normal death benefit .
Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- life insurance invests your premiums so that you can get some or all of them returned to you in the future . Most ROP policies must be in effect at least half of the term period in order to receive any premiums back if the policy is cancelled . This amount grows until it reaches 100 % on the last day of the policy . At that time , a check for the full amount of premiums paid in is sent to the policy owner . Of course , if death would occur before the term is ended , the death benefit would be paid to the beneficiary , just like with regular Term insurance . Contrary to regular Term insurance , where premiums are higher the longer the term , Return of Premium life insurance premiums are usually lower the longer the term .
The only type of term insurance that has a cash value is ROP Term . This stands for Return of Premium Term . About halfway through the term , it will pay back some cash if you surrender the policy . At the end of the term , it will pay back all the premiums you paid in . Keep in mind that the cash value of ROP term is not able to accessed unless you surrender the policy .
No , Term Life Insurance does not have a cash value . It 's relatively inexpensive price is due to it 's being pure life insurance protection , without any of the premium going to the accumulation of cash value . Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term Life Insurance does pay back the premiums paid in , if the policy is retained to the end of the term , and if the insured person is still alive at that time .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Can I Get Life Insurance Online In Texas ?
To get life insurance online in Texas , go to a website offering free , instant quotes , and enter your information . If a quote comes up for you , then that policy is probably offered in Texas . From there you can contact the agency , or they will most likely contact you , to confirm that you are qualified for that rate . You will be able to apply for the policy via mailed , emailed , faxed or digitally signed application . Once approved , you will receive the policy by mail .
You can get health insurance online in Texas ! The easiest and most efficient way to obtain the best rates and best coverage is through an experienced broker . That 's our job and why we have top-rated websites . The . gov website is still not free from glitches , delays and security concerns . And most experienced health insurance brokers can offer `` off-Exchange '' plans which you can not get through the government website . A broker will help determine the amount of your federal subsidy , so you can view how much your Texas health insurance rate will reduce and which options are the best . If you missed Open Enrollment , a broker can review short-term plan options and other viable choices .
If you are age 65 and receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be enrolled in Medicare . Otherwise , you can go to medicare.gov to read how to apply for Medicare in Texas . You will be walked through the instructions step by step and be able to apply online , if you like . You can also go to a local Texas Social Security office to apply for Medicare .
To get life insurance online in Texas , go to a website offering free , instant quotes , and enter your information . If a quote comes up for you , then that policy is probably offered in Texas . From there you can contact the agency , or they will most likely contact you , to confirm that you are qualified for that rate . You will be able to apply for the policy via mailed , emailed , faxed or digitally signed application . Once approved , you will receive the policy by mail .
You will need a new vehicle registration in Texas and with it a new Texas policy . there are honestly some differences in coverage that are routine in Texas and not so much in Georgia . For example in Texas you typically can buy PIP which is Personal Injury Protection which affords you and your passengers some coverages including wage loss that are not usually offered in GA. . In Ga most folks have medical payments coverage in lieu of PIP . It is not the same but is more limited . Keep in mind that much of auto insurance revolves around complying with state law . The DMV in both states gets a data feed form the companies on policies as they incept and as they are cancelled . With the situation you describe I think our agency may uniquely able to assist you . We currently are licensed in both states and can assist with your transition . So give us a call 1 - 866-933-4372
Texas is just like any other state . The best Medicare supplemental insurance plan is the one that matches your needs and is affordable . Medigap insurance rates vary considerably by zip code , age , tobacco use and plan . Medicare Plan F is the most expensive plans in Texas , and the most popular . It is also the plan that pays the agent the highest commission . Sometimes you can find instant Medicare rates online but you really should talk to a broker if you want to find the best rates .
First , I would consult an attorney in Texas to find out how Life Insurance is treated when there is a divorce . Generally speaking from my experience as a divorced father , Life Insurance is not an issue unless there is cash value which can be withdrawn . And if the Life Insurance was purchased during the marriage . If it was purchased prior , then it most likely would not be an issue . I know this is vague , which is why I recommend consulting an attorney in Texas .
Yes typically it is covered and covered on a replacement cost basis . Due to the frequency of major hail and windstorms in several states , we are seeing several companies offer only Actual cash value for older rooftops . So be sure you understand what your coverage is and how it will respond to a hail or windstorm -LRB- tornado or hurricane -RRB- . In some state per cent deductibles have been in use for decades such as in Texas . However much of the country has dollar amount deductibles . Also be aware that coverage is not automatically available in the voluntary market in all areas of coastal states So if you live in the fourteen counties in Texas along the Gulf or in Florida every where , you may have to obtain wind and hail coverage through a residual market mechanism such as the Texas Wind Insurance Association or Citizens Property Insurance in FL . A local agent in any coastal state should be a good starting point to understand what is available and where in your part of the country .
Greetings ! You have asked a very key question . To be honest , the short answer is ... It depends . Yes , I know not exactly what you were looking for . Let me step back and explain . The answer to your question depends not only on what company you take you coverage through , but also which policy type you elect . I agree with Felicia , who answered first , when she says consult with your agent . I would also suggest looking for information through OPIC if your are in Texas I suggest checking it out . It gives consumersinsurance information on Auto , Home ... etc. . They are : opic.state.tx.us online .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
The Texas Health Insurance Exchange was created to give Texas residents the opportunity to purchase affordable medical coverage from the top insurers in the state . Open Enrollment will begin October 1 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and policies will be effective in 2014 . Texas consumers can buy single , family and small business healthcare through the Exchange or with the help of experienced licensed brokers -LRB- and websites -RRB- . The new federal tax subsidy could possibly reduce premiums for persons that qualify . The `` Federal Poverty Level '' will be used to calculate eligibility and amount of the subsidy . Licensed and/or experienced brokers can also assist with this calculation .
There are several independent agencies -LRB- such as ours -RRB- that have websites that allow people to run health insurance quotes online and you can be reviewing plans in about a minute or two . It gives you instant information on plans from the major carriers and you can follow up with a licensed agent to get your questions answered . On our website it is under the `` other '' tab to go to under 65 health insurance . It is a great way to save a lot of time and get a full understanding of what health insurance plans are available in Texas .
It depends . What is your specific situation - how many vehicles do you have , how many drivers are in your household ? Do any drivers have any tickets or accidents in the last 3 years ? Do you own a home and/or have other assets ? These are just a few of the questions that we 'll look to get answered to help us determine the best path for you.Please understand that there are several great auto insurance companies here in Texas ; every situation is unique and has it 's own factors that will determine how to proceed in securing the best autoinsurance coverage for your unique situation . I guess the best answer is which auto insurance company can best fit and satisfy your current situation and current needs?Give us a call at 469.206.8048 or you can e-mail me at WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your situation to get you the protection you need .
That is a great question ! Here in Texas , it is 30 days , but each State will have its own regulations as to the time period they will allow to pass before ticketing you for not being properly registered . I had to have a policy that was issued in Texas before being able to register my car and get plates , you may need to switch your policy first also . I 'd recommend going on line to your new State 's Department of Motor Vehicles or Secretary of State webpage and see what your State requires . Good luck with your move , and thank you for asking !
Generally speaking yes . Windstorm is covered by your homeowners policy , but maybe treated separately by your policy as well . For example if you live in a coastal area wind coverage may be excluded and you obtain what coverage is available through a pooling arrangement such as a wind pool . For Example if you live in Galveston Texas you might you need three policies where as an inland customer would only need one.In Galveston your wind policy might be through the Texas Wind Insurance Association , your regular homeowners policy in the private market -LRB- exclusive of wind -RRB- . You may also be required to have a flood policy -LRB- from the National Flood Insurance Program -RRB- because your insurer does not want to see you in a dilemma of having one group say the damage was caused by wind borne water and another saying it is flood coverage after the loss . To keep your understanding of what is necessary visit with your agent and discuss your personal situation . One other thing I should mention is that depending on where you live you may have a separate , hurricane deductible , wind and hail deductible , named storm deductible . These are often per cent deductibles and can mean a substantial out of pocket costs in the event of a windstorm . They are not exclusively used in hurricane prone areas . For example in Austin Texas you might have a $ 1000 deductible for most homeowners coverage -LRB- perils -RRB- , but 1 % wind and hail deductible even though Austin is over 200 miles to the Gulf .
The average cost of life insurance in Texas depends on the person . Young people with excellent health pay far less than older persons with poor health . The type of policy also enters in , with permanent insurance having a higher price tag than term . To find the average price for a particular person in Texas , go to a website quote engine that provides quotes for your state . If you choose an instant quoter , you can input different face amounts and terms and see how they vary .
There is no real significant premium difference in Texas , than in any other state except perhaps New York . If you go online with any life insurance brokerage firm , you can generate a spreadsheet that displays the premium of some of the top companies in the country.You can change out the state to compare premium pricing to verify the costs by state .
The easiest way to compare home insurance quotes in Texas is to contact an independent insurance broker here in Texas and have them shop the market for you . An independent insurance broker works with several different companies ; this allows you to make only 1 call to the broker and they shop the market for you.This process helps to ensure that you get the best coverage at the best rate . We are an independent insurance broker and will be happy to prepare free , no obligation home insurance proposals for your review . Contact us at 469-206-8048 or you can e-mail me at WEBSITELINK .
The price of life insurance in Texas , as in the other 49 states , varies according to the age of the person purchasing it , the sex , tobacco use , health , face amount and type of policy . The longer you lock in the premium , the higher it usually is , and the price also goes up as the person ages . So it is not that life insurance costs more in Texas , it is those other factors that affect the rates . You can help yourself get the lowest rate by shopping an online agency that carries lots of choices and that knows how to find the best rate for your unique characteristics .
Life insurance in Texas is not taxed for income tax , in most situations . Life insurance proceeds do fall under the value of the estate if the policy owner is the deceased , and the one with the estate . If his/her spouse is no longer alive , federal estate taxes will be charged on the excess about the exempted amount , which is $ 5,250,000 in 2013 . Texas does not have a state estate tax at this time .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Car Insurance Have To Be In Owners Name ?
When you lease a car you do not hold the title so you are not the ` owner ' of the vehicle . Your lease may require you to provide insurance on the vehicle . Your policy -LRB- in your name -RRB- names the lessor as additional insured for liability coverages and loss payee for physical damasge coverages . If an individual holds title to the vehicle and you want to insure it , you will most likely have to register the vehicle in your name -LRB- a form from the state 's DMV authorizes this -RRB- and obtain insurance to cover your registration and plates . In this instance you would also name the individual title holder as additional insured for liability and loss payee for physical damage . If they have a lienholder on the vehicle you will have to include the lienholder as first loss payee and the individual as second loss payee . Chec k with a knowledgeable agent or broker who writes auto insurance for specific details . Your state 's DMV can also provide information . Maske sure an insurance carrier will underwrite the policy should you want to insure a vehicle you do not hold the title to .
In Connecticut , the car insurance policy needs to be issued in the same name as that which appears on the car 's title and registration . If you happen to have a car loan or are leasing , those interested parties will be listed on your policy in accordance with their particular requirements .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
In order to drive a vehicle in many States , the law requires a licensed driver to be insured ! If the driver does not own a vehicle , a policy form is available by the name of ` Named Non-Owner ' Insurance ; this insurance provides liability and optional uninsured motorist coverage for the named insured driving a vehicle not titled in his/her name . If you have a Named Non-Owner Insurance policy , the carrier upon request will issue an SR-22 endorsement to the Governing State Department of Motor Vehicles . In the event that the insurance is cancelled , an SR-26 cancellation form is issued and sent to the Governing Department in order to confirm cancellation of the insurance thus cancelling the SR-22 . If one does not desire to purchase the insurance and is merely attempting to get a Form SR-22 issued , there is no method to do so without keeping active insurance for the term that the SR-22 is required . The SR-22 is simply a reporting form confirming continuous coverage . Many States now require electronic reporting between insurance carriers and the State Department of Motor Vehicles .
Who owns the life insurance policy when the owner dies ? That depends if there is a contingent owner named in the policy . It does not automatically transfer to the life insured . if there is no contingent owner named in the policy , the the ownership would transfer to the owner 's estate and will be dealt with there . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . .
Not sure where you live , but here in CT , Insurance Policies need to be issued in the name -LRB- s -RRB- of the registered owners of a vehicle . Therefore , if one or both of your parents own the car , the policy would be issued in their name -LRB- s -RRB- and you would be listed on the policy as a rated driver of that car . If however , you are theregistered owner of the car , then the policy needs to be issued in your name .
If there is a contingent owner named , the owner of the policy will become the contingent owner i -LRB- f the original owner of the policy dies -RRB- . If the insured person and policy owner are two different people , it is important to name a contingent owner so that the wishes of the policy owner are followed .
I 'm not familiar with policies in California , and I 've never heard of a `` drive other car '' policy . But in most states , the answer below would not be true . For non-vehicle owners in most states , the driver would need what is called a `` named operator 's '' -LRB- aka non-owners -RRB- policy . Some states also have what is known as a `` broad formed named driver policy '' . Either of these policies will cover a driver who does n't own a vehicle . There is also another rare type of policy for non-owners called a financial responsibility bond -LRB- I believe Ohio is the only state that has financial responsibility bonds -RRB- . But contrary to the answer above : 1 . the vehicle owner 's auto insurance is the primary insurance , and the non-owners policy is secondary . 2 . these policies will not work for rental vehicles because these types of policies do not offer comprehensive and collision coverage , both of which a rental company is going to require . The only coverage these policies offer are liability , uninsured motorist and medical payments coverage .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
In CT anyway , in most cases , the insurance needs to match the vehicle 's registration . There are a couple of situations , however , where you as an individual may be able to purchaseinsurance for as auto that is not in your name . For personal insurance , you may be able to obtain `` Named Non Owner '' coverage . This does n't insure the car , but it does provide liability for you while you are driving it . The other situation is for an auto that is titled and registered to a business . If you own a businessthat is set up as a separate entity , namely a Corporation or a Legal Liability Company -LRB- LLC -RRB- for example , then you can and should obtain insurance for that autounder the company name .
This depends on the type of contract . There are two types of annuity contacts : 1 . Owner driven contracts 2 . Annuitant driven contracts What happens on death depends on which type . For an owner driven contract , when the owner dies the contracts cash surrender value is paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- of the contract . For annuitant driven contracts , when the annuitant -LRB- not necessarily the owner -RRB- dies the cash surrender value of the contract is paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- of the contract . Almost all contracts issued today are owner driven contracts . Most annuitant driven contracts found today are older annuity contracts . It is prudent to figure out which kind of contract you have , especially if you have a different owner and annuitant .
Car insurance follows the car . It is based on the household attached to the car . Every licensed driver in the household should be included on the policy or excluded by endorsement . If two unmarried person occupy the same household , the cars attached to that household will include both as drivers . The policy will probably name the registered owner of the car as the primary insured but can name the other driver as a secondary insured .
In Canada , if the owner of the policy dies . what happens to the ownership of the policy depends on what the owner had put in place prior to his/her death . If the owner has named a contingent owner the the policy would transfer that way . If their was no contingent owner the the ownership would form part of the estate and be probated . Depending on who the policy ownership was transferred to there could be tax consequences . The cash value is what could be surrendered , the death benefit is not paid until the life insured 's death . NOTE , once the policy has been issued the life insured has no claim on the policy or its cash value , unless the owner gave them the access . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
In California insurance follows the car , not the driver . The car is associated with a household and the drivers in the household are named on the policy . If you are driving a car that doesnt belong to you and are at fault in an accident , the insurance carried by the owner of the car on that car will be primary coverage . If the claims on the policy exceed the limits of the policy the policy where you are named as a driver will provide additional coverage up to the limits of that policy .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
More than likely not . Here in CT , the named insured on the auto policy needs to match the registered owner of the car . Now , that having been said , it would be a very good idea for you to speak with your Insurance Professional about any coverage options that may be available to you . If you are going to be a regular driver of this person ' e car , you may be added to their auto policy . It may also be possible for you to obtain a `` named non-owner ' policy . This would provide you with liability coverage but would not provide any physical damage coverage -LRB- Comprehensive and/or Collision -RRB- on the car that you are driving .
I caution anybody to not just assume anybody can drive your car . Most polices have permissive use , but keep in mind , the owner of the car and his insurance company are responsible if there is a loss as insurance follows the vehicle . Also your limits may be reduced to state minimums meaning if the accident exceeds the coverage amounts , the owner , although they were not in the accident can be held liable since the owner loaned the car out . Another thing to consider , permissive use in most cases does not apply to household members who do not have their own car and insurance . All household members who have access to the vehicle are required to be listed or excluded . There has been a great abuse of this by people who do not want to list children or relatives to avoid potentially higher premiums which have resulted in severe consequences when a claim arises And yet another thing to consider is there are carriers who do not have permissive use on their policy at all . If the carrier is unaware of the individual who is operating the vehicle there is no coverage on the owners policy . Always talk to your agent about how your particular policy works and the potential ramifications of loaning out your vehicle .
In Canada if you have a named beneficiary and not your estate then the proceeds bypass probate and are paid directly to the beneficiary . If you name a beneficiary in the `` protected class '' , spouse , parent , child , grandchild , then the policy is potentially protected from the owner 's creditors during the lifetime of the person whose life is insured . In all provinces except Quebec , the relationship must be between the life insured and the beneficiary . In Quebec , it is between the owner and the beneficiary . If you designate a beneficiary as irrevocable , then the policy also has potential creditor protection . In addition no changes to the policy can be made without the irrevocable beneficiary 's consent . If a corporation is owner and paying the premiums on a policy , the the company should be the beneficiary otherwise it will be considered to be a taxable benefit . Ultimately , who should be named the beneficiary depends on what you want to accomplish . If you have any further question or feel I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community ,
The Owner of a Life Insurance policy is free to make any changes to that policy by sending a signed form into the insuring company . No one but the owner of that policy is free to do so . Generally , the named insured is also the owner , but this does not necessarily have to be the case . If the insuring company and the insured 's Insurance Professional have documentation that the change was requested by the policy owner , I think you might have a difficult time arguing the point and it might have to be taken to a court to decide if such a change was made by illegal or coercive means .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Where Should I Keep My Car Insurance Card ?
If you are in a mandatory insurance state , a currently datedinsurance ID should be kept in the car . If a driver of the car is stopped by law enforcement and can not provide proof the vehicle is insured , there will likely be a fine assessed the driver . If you do n't have current ID , most insurance companies provide internet access to obtain one or your insurance professional can send you one .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
Yes ! One of the primary points of getting life insurance after getting married is for income protection purposes so your spouse can maintain the same lifestyle for a given amount of time without having to worry about financial matters . When a family loses an income stream due to the death of a spouse , the surviving spouse often has to make a dramatic shift in lifestyle choices with no way to have that income immediately replaced - this can be everything from losing your house because the income is not there to pay the mortgage , to pay off the car loans , credit card debts -LRB- which can increase rapidly in this case as it 's a quick source for people to delay paying immediate bills , but draws substantially large interest rate charges and can put that person into even bigger debt -RRB- . This is where life insurance comes in . Instead of using 100 % of your own money , you use someone else 's -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- so your spouse does n't have to worry about financial matters so heavily right after the death of a loved one . For income replacement purposes , you ideally want to have at least a 5-7x income value so if you are making $ 100,000 per year , you want to have at least $ 500,000 - $ 700,000 of coverage for that type of purpose . As noted earlier , you would then add in other debts you do n't want your spouse to have to worry about such as mortgage , cars , credit cards , etc. . Term insurance works great for taking care of the mortgage and other temporary expenses because you may only need coverage for those items for a specified number of years -LRB- e.g. 20 year or 30 years -RRB- . A great idea for people is to create a step-down process where you have a larger amount of coverage in the immediate and a lower amount in later years when the larger amount of coverage may not be needed at that future point . This can help reduce costs for coverage and use the savings in premiums towards other avenues such as retirement planning , investments , savings , etc. . If you would like to go over this information in further detail , discuss your life insurance needs , and any other questions you may have , please feel free contact me by clicking on the button next to my picture and I will be happy to help . I do not charge any fees for my services and my group is licensed with over 50 insurance companies to compare rates through . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much for your question .
In my experience , most of the major cards provide some coverage when the card is used to secure a rental car . Obviously , you should call the customer service number for your card to confirm exactly what benefits are provided . The coverage is usually for physical damage of the car and provides protection up to $ 500.00 . This works nicely in most cases because assuming you have your own personal car insurance , on average it is very likely that you are carying a $ 500.00 deductible for both Comprehensive and Collision on that policy .
The first place that you can check is Policy Locator Service through the Medical Information Bureau . MIB Group , Inc is a cooperative data exchange formed by the North American life insurance industry in 1909 . There is a cost associated with the search but it will return results via mail with a list of queries by insurance companies for underwriting on the search subject , from whenever they were `` shopped '' for insurance . Keep in mind , that this is not 100 % inclusive for all insurers . The search form is located here WEBSITELINK Secondly , through some sleuthing using either the above list or my following list of suggestions , you should contact the insurers on your target list , in order to verify the active policies . Where to search : - Credit card and bank statements : Go back through the insured 's financial records and look for periodic payments to insurers , whether it be on a monthly , quarterly , semi-annual or annual basis . This should indicate who the insurer is/was based upon where the money is paid to . - Banks , Credit Unions , Credit card companies : Often times , many banks , lenders and credit companies offer group policies for their account holders for as little as $ 1,000.00 of coverage and higher amounts based upon certain requirements . Check with these groups to see if they had offered any of these products at any point in time . - Pay stubs/Employers and Benefits companies : Many employers offer a basic life or AD&D policy to full time employees for free as well as inexpensive group policies . Deductions for the premium payments on the group policies may be found on the insured 's pay stub . However , many times , this coverage is only active when the insured is employed . - Split Dollar/Executive Compensation plans : Some employers taking advantage of tax regulations , used life insurance to pay benefits to key employees which may have also been part of Supplemental Exec Retirement Plans -LRB- SERP -RRB- . Verify with the insured 's former employers if any plan existed . - Unions , Pensions and Fraternal organizations : Many Unions and Pension funds may have a small paid-up policy on the insured as part of their benefits package . The same goes for Fraternal organizations including Knights of Columbus , Elks , Masons , etc. . Many times the search is no easy task however , after a bit of detective work and dedication , you may uncover a handful of forgotten or unknown small policies , where the cumulative benefit adds up and more than justifies the search !
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Medicare will allow you to make multiple copies of your Medicare card . If you want one of the copies laminated that should work most of the time . Keep an unlaminated card in your wallet as well for the times when someone decides that they can not take a laminated card . I do know that the cards get pretty tattered .
This depends upon where you are coming from . If you currently live in the U.S. you will have a couple of options . There are endorsements available through your current Home and Auto policies for rented/non-owned cars . If you have a credit card , then the credit card might offer car rental insurance if it is used to purchase the rental . If you do n't have Home/Auto insurance in the U.S. or a credit card then you can always purchase rental insurance through the rental agency . I hope these options help .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Some insurance companies will not accept credit cards for payment of premiums . Some will . Typically if you pay your premiums annually , semi-annually or quarterly many providers will accept credit card payment . It seems the biggest issue with credit cards is that people tend to forget about updating their information as needed with the companies they pay by credit card . When a card expires and is replaced with a new expiration date , the previous card is no longer useable . Sometimes people will delete a credit card account that was being used for automatic payments and not inform their creditor of a replacement card . It creates a lot of accounting headaches . So insurance companies prefer to debit from checking or savings accounts .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
The answer to your question will vary depending upon the health insurance company you are enrolling with , whether your coverage is through an employer or is individual health insurance , and increasingly with the time of year you are enrolling . If you are enrolling through your employer 's plan then it is reasonable to expect that it will take 5 to 10 business days for you to receive your new member packet with your physical ID card . Many group health insurance carriers have the functionality through their web sites for your HR person or for you to be able to print out a temporary ID card within 24 to 48 hours of their receiving and processing your enrollment form . For persons taking out individual health insurance it is usually around 10 business days after receiving your application that your new member kit with your ID card will be mailed to you . Some individual carriers also provide for the production of temporary ID cards from their web site after your enrollment form has been processed . When an individual is enrolling in individual health insurance during the annual open enrollment period you should understand that our nation has now gone to a system that forces people to enroll in a prescribed time period each year . Millions of people are being processed during this period and it strains the capacity of even the largest health insurance companies to process this volume of enrollments that are coming from both the government based health insurance marketplaces and from direct enrollments . While the process should get better with time , the first year 's open enrollment left much to be desired from an efficiency standpoint and the consumer should be prepared for longer waiting times to get their ID cards following open enrollment . In 2014 waiting times of well over a month were not uncommon and in some instances the waiting periods some people experienced were even longer .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
In most cases , when someone turns 65 they are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . The exception is if someone is working full time , then they will need to enroll themselves . If you do n't want to keep the Part B coverage , you send back a card that is provided , stating that you want to drop it . If you keep that card , you keep the Part B coverage and pay the Part B premiums .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Long Does It Take To Get Money From A Life Insurance Policy ?
Normally , it can take as little as a week or two to receive death proceeds of a life insurance policy from the time the insurer receives a claim form and the death certificate . In the event of death in the first two policy years , the insurer will need more time to investigate the claim as death occurred within the two year contestability period of the policy .
You can anticipate a wait of one to two months to get money from a life insurance policy , although it could be shorter , and -LRB- rarely -RRB- longer . To expedite it , order enough certified death certificates at the time of death to cover all policies you may find . Call your agent or the insurance company to have them email you the death claim . The sooner they receive these items , the sooner the life insurance proceeds will be paid .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
That is a great question ! Whenever you deposit money into an account , be it at your bank , credit union , or annuity fund , that money does n't just sit there in a box labelled `` you '' . The financial institution immediately takes the money from the `` you '' box , and uses it to cover their expenses , pay out someone else , or invest it to make their profits . When you take that money out early , it costs them , as they were planning on it being there until the annuitization phase of your annuity was scheduled to begin . Now they have to scramble to get the money back into the `` you '' box . That often costs them money from the interest they were earning by using the money you 'd put in your `` box '' . To recapture some of their loss , and to act as an incentive to deter you from pulling out your `` box '' early , they assess the surrender charges . You will notice that they are highest at the beginning of your annuity , and decrease as time goes on . That is because the longer your money stays with them , the more likely it is that they 've earned what they needed to to repay your money with it 's promised interest . Does that help ? I hope so , feel free to contact me if it does n't , okay ? Thanks for asking !
When taking money from a Life Insurance Policy you need to consider the impact on your policy when you take a withdrawal or a loan . Both are available within your policy providing you have the cash value available . A withdrawal is taking money out of the cash value , with no intention of putting it back into the policy . The death benefit will be reduced in most cases as well as the remaining cash value . As long as the withdrawal is less than the money you have paid into the policy , there should not be a taxable event . If you do exceed the money you have paid in , then you will have to pay taxes on the amount over . On the other hand , a loan is a great option especially if you want to pay back the money taken . Look at your policy to understand the loan provisions . There is a fixed rate and most likely a variable rate . Depending how the policy credits money , and what the expected future growth might be , will determine which loan option may work best . Sometimes clients will take a withdrawal up to the cost basis , the premium you have paid in , then switch to a loan to minimize any tax burden . Like mentioned on the other comments , if you have a loan and the policy lapses , you will a potential taxable event which at the end of the current tax year , you will get the appropriate statement/form from the insurance company . Please consult your agent/broker prior to making any decisions .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies will set a commencement date far enough ahead into the future to show you an impressive number for your return , and that is the date by which you must have started taking your withdrawals . The truth is that you can take money out at any time , BUT - there are serious consequences if you are n't careful . An annuity is not a suitable product for someone who has cash flow issues , and might need the money sooner than later . I 'd advise you to look at your policy , and look for these things : Do I have a free withdrawal amount , if so , how much and when can I start taking it ? How long is the surrender period , and what are the charges ? -LRB- If the surrender period is ten years , that means every year during that period , whatever you withdraw will be subject to that fee , among likely others , as well as a federal penalty of 10 % if you are younger than 591/2 -RRB- The last thing to look at is what triggers if you pull money out . Does it start , or lock in a payment cycle for you ? Again , that could be disastrous if you are n't very careful . Let the money ride in there as long as you can afford to , -LRB- at least until you are 60 -RRB- and then start taking your withdrawals . Depending on how your annuity is structured , you may be required to start your rmd 's at the age of 701/2 . If you 'd like help with your specifics , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
You know , there really is a right way to answer this question . I think the right way is to do whats best for you as the beneficiary . Life insurance is , after all , a care package from the insured to his loved one . It is a way of saying , I love you , and I take care of you now . Im going to make sure that an insurance company takes care of you later . This means that the golden rule is this : the quality of life you have now , is the quality of life you should have if you suffer the tragic loss of your spouse . If you are not making do with less now , you should not have to make do with less later . The money you need to pay your monthly bills now , is the amount of money you should have to pay your monthly bills later . The larger question is : for how long do you need this benefit to last ? For how long do you want to live off the insurance money ? There are a number of factors involved in that decision . First , and most important , is buying yourself the time needed to grieve and move on . Think about it . You have dedicated yourself to a life with someone . Now he is not there . And will not return . How long will it tell you to get back on your own two feet and renew your life ? Two years ? Five years ? Longer ? Then , what about your kids ? Theyve already lost one of their parents . Forever . They will need you more than ever . They will need you to spend as much time with them as possible . Can you afford to do this ? Life insurance can make sure the answer is yes .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
This is the $ 64,000 question , isnt it ? -LRB- And the answer , by the way , is not $ 64,000 of coverage ; nor should you have to pay $ 64,000 in premium . But some people do , and it is well worth it . -RRB- That is a very important consideration . Life insurance premium is money well spent . Each dollar of benefit literally cost pennies . If you get the best rate available , then it costs you a few pennies . If you qualify for a higher premium , that it costs you a few more pennies . In either case , it is an extremely economical way to make sure your heirs and beneficiaries get all the money they need , exactly when they need it . Having said that , I have a very simple philosophy when it comes to determining the face amount . When it comes to taking care of your family , be generous . Losing you will be an incomparable trauma for them . Financial stress and strain would really hurt them . Even having to reduce their standard of living somewhat will cause distress . Give them enough money to live well . It wont take you too much time to calculate just how much money would be needed to accomplish that . When it comes to leaving money to your favorite charity , be prudent . A life insurance benefit could represent a substantial donation to them . They need to have demonstrated a high measure of accountability and responsibility in managing their finances , to qualify for a great gift . Give them enough money to make a difference and take a few good strides towards fulfilling their purpose . And considering spreading your wealth around to various good causes . When it comes to taking care of your business obligations , be exact . Have your accountant crunch the numbers to make sure your partnership agreement is adequately funded . Determine the value of your key people and make sure your company is indemnified against their loss . Account for any and all debt , and make sure there is enough coverage to take care of it . Your business should be able to flourish without you . If you have built it correctly , new leadership should be in place , and the money should be there , for the show to go on . That is successful entrepreneurism .
Life Insurance underwriting takes as long as it takes the life insurance underwriter to collect all the data needed to approve your policy . If you apply for a policy that does not need any exam or medical records , the process may take less than 24 hours . If they do not require an exam but can order medical records , it will take as long as it takes you or your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- to provide those records . If they require an exam , you will not be approved until at least 3 days after you take the exam . In other words , the faster you and your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- respond to the underwriter 's requests , the shorter the time it generally takes for your policy to be approved . However , things can get held up if life insurance companies get behind , the paramed examiner will not work with you to set up your exam , your doctor 's office is slow to provide your medical records to the life insurance company , and/or additional medical records must be ordered weeks or months into the process . Above all , a good Case Manager who regularly communicates with you and the insurance company can shave time off the underwriting process . Using an agency that has great customer service may not only help speed things up , it may be the key to getting your life insurance put into effect , period .
How long does it take to collect proceeds from a life policy ? Not all that long . Most of the time is spent getting the information together . You are going to need a certified copy of the certificate of death . Actually you should have 5 or 6 made as you will need them for other things besides insurance . When you have the paperwork together and submit , usually it does n't take long for payment to be sent to the beneficiaries . Usually about 5 working days or so with the companies I have worked with . You also will receive interest on the money held while the paperwork is being put together as part of the claim .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Which Life Insurance Premiums Are Tax Deductible ?
Many premiums of insurance policies are tax deductible as a business expense . Life Insurance , disability insurance but deductions will have to be repaid , health . insurance only if used for medical expenses , and more pertaining to business expense only . Employers who take out insurance on the employees or as a group will receive the tax break but the beneficiaries will receive the benefits tax free .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Life insurance in general is not tax deductible . However , in several instances it can be . The two most important taxes to considering a deduction is income tax & estate tax . Under income tax , life insurance is deductible inside a qualified retirement plan , like a pension or profit sharing . There are some other instances that it may be deductible for a company . In regards , to the estate tax , life insurance is not really deductible , but it can be taxed heavily if not set up correctly . The ownership of the life insurance policy determines if it is included in the estate & taxed or excluded from the estate and not taxed ! In all cases , base to seek competent advisors .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
In Canada , in most cases , life insurance premiums are not deductible . There are a couple of exceptions : 1 . If the insured is applying for a loan and the institution lending the funds requests that he or she buy life insurance as collateral , a portion of the premiums on that policy qualify as a deductible expense -LRB- the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -RRB- 2 . Where a donor donates a life insurance policy to a charity or a charity takes out a policy on the donors life , the premiums paid by the donor will be considered a charitable donation eligible for a charitable tax credit -LRB- for individuals -RRB- or deduction -LRB- for corporations -RRB- . Even though it is not deductible there are several situations where corporate owned life insurance should be considered . For example : The insurance is required to fund a buy-sell agreement , there will be more than one insured shareholder . There will probably be different ages and unequal premium rates . There may also be cost differences among shareholders due to underwriting premium ratings . Corporate-owned policies help to equalize the resulting premium differences . The taxpayer with the lowest tax rate requires less pre-tax income to pay the premiums ; their dollars are cheaper . In many cases that could be the corporation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . -LRB- Since tax laws vary by jurisdiction and do change , check with your local tax and professional advisors . -RRB- Note : The information contained in this article is intended to provide general guidelines only . The application and impact of the law can vary widely from case to case based on the specific or unique facts involved . Accordingly , the information in this article is not intended to serve as legal , accounting or tax advice . Users are encouraged to consult with their professional advisers for advice concerning specific matters before making a decision .
Can you deduct life insurance premiums ? It 's going to depend on what type of life insurance you are talking about . If you are referring to group life the cost of premiums up to 50,000 in face amount can be deducted . Above that for group , no.For that type of plan the benefit is not taxed . The big issue for other coverage is if you take the tax deduction on the premium , you pay taxes on the benefit , which would be a much greater tax hit than the taxes on the premium .
Typically , you can not claim your home owner 's insurance on your primary residence as a deduction on your taxes . If you own , rental homes , then you could deduct the premiums as a tax deduction . A good rule of thumb for insurance used for personal benefit -LRB- not a business use -RRB- ... if you can deduct the premiums on your taxes , the benefits are likely to be taxed . Disability is probably the best illustration ... if the premiums are taken out pre-tax , then the benefit is taxed . Life insurance inside a pension plan is another example ... the death benefit is taxed as income !
Medicare Part A is typically $ 0 as long as you met your 40 quarters -LRB- or 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes -LRB- Medicare taxes -RRB- . If you have not met that requirement , the monthly premium is up to $ 426 per month . For 2014 , the premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 . This can change each year and is based on your modified adjusted gross income on your tax return from 2 years prior . You may also face a high-income premium penalty on your Part B coverage . The $ 104.90 premium is for those with incomes of $ 85,000 or less , if filing an individual tax return , and $ 170,000 , if filing a joint tax return . If your income was between $ 85,000 and $ 107,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 170,000 and $ 214,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 146.90 . If your income was between $ 107,000 and $ 160,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 214,000 and $ 320,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 209.80 . If your income was between $ 160,000 and $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 320,000 and $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 272.70 . If your income was above $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 335.70 . You can encounter other expenses as well such as the Part A and Part B deductibles and late enrollment penalties for not enrolling in Part B when you were first eligible for Medicare . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You 're generally responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can greatly help establish a predictable expense structure - essential for individuals on a fixed income in retirement . It will limit the amount of cost you 're susceptible to in the event of an illness or injury .
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
Disability insurance can count as taxable income or it can be tax free . The simple way to determine if disability income benefits are going to be taxed or not is by determining who pays the premiums ? If you have your disability through an employer who pays your premiums and deducts them from the company taxes , then yes your disability benefits are taxed as income . If you purchase disability insurance and you pay the premiums which are not tax deductible then your disability benefits are tax free . Always consult a professional tax advisor as well when it comes to your taxes .
In Canada , disability insurance payments are usually structured so that the payment is tax free . This applies to individual plans as well as group plans . The basic principle is , if the premium is paid with after tax dollars , then the benefit is tax free . If the premium is deducted as an expense -LRB- employee benefit -RRB- , then the benefit payment is taxable . That is why with group insurance plans the premium split is structured so that the employee pays the Long Term Disability -LRB- LTD -RRB- portion of the premium . This is done to keep the benefit tax free . Plans can be structured to provide a benefit to employees with the company paying the premium on the policies and deducting it as an expense . Certain rules need to be followed . Here is an overview : Company pays premium for coverage , gets the deduction , employee does not pay tax on the premium `` benefit '' , but any disability benefit is taxable . In order to offset the income tax , the amount of coverage the employee is permitted to apply for is increased . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
Deducting your healthcare premiums is not only possible , but makes financial sense . I 'll use myself as an example . I have been an insurance broker for 33 years so there may not be a better resource . I own an HSA -LRB- along with the High-Deductible-Health-Plan -RRB- and have been a supporter of this type of policy for many years . Although I may file my taxes differently than yourself , I am able to deduct a portion of the premiums along with the proceeds that are deposited into the HSA . A self-employed person can deduct health insurance on their taxes in a number of ways . However , whether you use Turbo-Tax or simply complete your own tax return without help , it s always wise to consult a tax expert or the IRS website regarding deductibility of health insurance . And remember that premiums and actual expenses may be treated differently as well persons that itemize vs. not itemizing .
We insurance people like to use all sorts of acronyms , it keeps us mysterious and sexy . CDHP is the abbreviation for Consumer Directed Health Plan . This is a bit of a fuzzy designation but it is generally used in reference to a high deductible health insurance policy meant to be tied to a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA - see more mysterious letters -RRB- . An example would be a health insurance policy with a deductible of $ 6350 for an individual followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that -LRB- this is the maximum allowable in 2014 -RRB- . This plan would have no office visit , emergency room or prescription copayments with all covered services subject to the $ 6350 deductible . The premium for such a plan design should be meaningfully less than that of a lower deductible plan with copayments . The high deductible health plan policyholder is supposed to take their premium savings and set them aside in a Health Savings Account from which they pay for their routine expenses such as office visits and prescriptions . The amounts a person sets aside in an HSA reduce their net taxable income which reduces their taxes thus saving them not only premium dollars but tax dollars . Unused funds in the HSA can rollover from year-to-year and accumulate on a tax deferred basis over time to build up a financial nest egg that can be tapped into in a person 's Medicare eligibility years to pay for future medical expenses .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Do They Take Blood And Urine For Life Insurance ?
Why do they take blood and urine for life insurance ? Because tests on both blood and urine provide a wealth of information about a person 's current health . Just as your regular doctor would do , the labs produced from these two draws provide information on organ function levels , blood sugars , cholesterol and other body chemistries . Sort ofa snapshot of your health on a given day .
These exams are taken to test for certain illnesses and precursors to illnesses . Many diseases can be discovered through blood samples and urine because the labs test for certain abnormalities in the blood , sugar levels , etc. . In some cases , the lab may find things that your family doctor has n't detected or even tested you for . Also , as stated before , drug abuse may be uncovereded through these exams . All these factors affect insurance underwriting and rates . The less healthy you are , the higher the risk for the insurance company to put coverage on you .
The life insurance company takes blood and urine tests during the life insurance application process in order to test for a number of things . They are looking for evidence of heart disease as indicated by cholesterol and other lipids , diabetes as evidenced by glucose , liver function , kidney function , blood diseases , tobacco use , drug use and HIV , among others .
This is designed to test for tobacco , drugs , and sexually transmitted disease such as HIV . A famous basketball player discovered he had HIV through an insurance exam . By doing blood and urine it helps the company putyou in the proper rate class . If you are clean this can be a benefit and save you money on your premium byhelpingyou qualifying for super-preferred rates .
Life insurance requires a determination of an applicants medical condition . Collecting samples of blood and urine can test for a battery of health items that may point to a condition that has mortality ramifications . The longer the life expectancy the lower the premiums for the death benefit . Conversely , the shorter the life expectancy , the higher the premium .
Why do they take blood and urine for life insurance ? Because tests on both blood and urine provide a wealth of information about a person 's current health . Just as your regular doctor would do , the labs produced from these two draws provide information on organ function levels , blood sugars , cholesterol and other body chemistries . Sort ofa snapshot of your health on a given day .
While life insurance does not test directly for cancer , the blood or urine test can reveal labs that might point to cancer . Total blood count -LRB- showing excessively high or low white or red blood cell counts -RRB- would be the most obvious , but abnormal liver labs or even high protein in the urine could be examples of other tests that COULD indicate cancer . That is why , if labs are abnormal , insurance companies will often postpone until you can get a diagnosis for those results . Once the condition is treated , they will pick up where they left off .
This seems to be a common question as I have answered this once today already . It is important to know what the medical exam will entail . Is there going to be blood or urine needed ? Are medical questions going to be asked ? Is a resting EKG needed ? I always recommend getting this completed first think in the morning before you eat breakfast or have a lite breakfast prior . That is what we call a fasting blood and urine so all the excess junk has time to filter through your body . In other words , do not eat a juicy burger and then have your blood & urine sample taken as the results will be off . Know your medical history and what doctors you have seen as well as their addresses in case the insurance company wants to get more information which is likely . Relax for the blood pressure readings which generally will be taken 3 times and you should be relaxed for the resting EKG if needed .
In order to prepare for your exam you first will need to exactly what is going to happen . In other words , are you going to give blood , urinate in a cup , get a resting EKG , answer medical questions , etc. . You should ask your agent what information and test that will be requested . It is best to have an 8 hour fast before the blood and urine so you get the best chance of accurate readings . -LRB- So do n't get your blood drawn right after eating a big greasy burger . The extra cholesterol will show up and mess up your NORMAL levels -RRB- . the resting EKG you should be relaxed as well as for the the blood pressure test which they will normally take 3 readings . For the medical information , be sure you know your history including doctors and their addresses . The more you can provide if necessary , the easier underwriting will be .
Life insurance tests urine for medically underwritten life insurance policies to detect drug and nicotine usage , among other things . Urinalyses can show evidence of diabetes -LRB- or poor diabetic control -RRB- , renal disease , cancer , blood disorders , or infection . Not all life insurance policies require a urine test ; nonmed policies do not perform blood or urine tests .
Most life insurance companies that are selling fully underwritten plans use a service called paramedical companies . They send out a nurse to record your health history and collect vital signs and samples . The nurse will take height , weight , blood pressure , blood and urine samples . In older clients or higher face amounts they will collect an EKG . The blood and urine are tested for common diseases but also drugs including nicotine , prescriptions and illegal drugs such as THC , amphetamines , depressants , cocaine , heroine and hallucinogens . In other words underwriters are very through . The prescription drugs are compared to medical records to check for abuse as well .
In order to prepare for a life insurance health exam , there are a number of things to do and not do . You want your health exam to to be as good as it can be to in order to receive the best rates possible and avoid additional tests , Start with a good night 's sleep before the exam and do not do any heavy exercise for 24 hours before , You may be required to fast for 12 hours if a blood test is being done . Regardless avoid food and drink -LRB- except water -RRB- for 2 hours prior . Drinking water before the exam is a good idea to provide a urine specimen . Avoid caffeine for several hours and alcoholic beverages for at least 8 hours before the exam . If you smoke , avoid smoking for at least 1 hour before the exam . Continue taking any prescription medicines and bring them to the exam for reference . If you are taking over-the-counter medicines , try and avoid them for 24 hours prior to your exam . Inform the examiner if you do take one and why you did . Abnormal tests can result if you are ill or under stress at the time of the exam . If you are unable to reschedule , be sure and inform the examiner . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Underwriting to obtain life insurance may require a small blood draw for testing , but that is only on the original application . Guaranteed acceptance and usually smaller benefit policies do not require blood or urine samples . The greater the risk to the insurance company , that is the more benefit amount applied for , the more underwriting requirements there are including blood and urine samples and possibly an EKG . Age also plays into it .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Here is the list that I keep on file for my clients : >> Fast for a minimum of 8 Hours Prior to Exam unless you are diabetic or have another health condition . If you do have a health condition we will discuss specific instructions for your case . >> Insist on Morning appointments only ! Blood pressure and exam results tend to be better in the morning . Many examiners are available on Saturdays as well . >> If you are sick on the day of your exam , cancel . We can always reschedule the exam when you are better . >> Take your medications as you normally would . >> Avoid alcohol for a minimum of 24 hours prior to your exam . Blood pressure , liver enzymes and more may be elevated otherwise . >> If you smoke , do not smoke prior to your exam . Smoking raises blood pressure . For cigar smokers and other tobacco users Some of the companies will give you a non-smoker rate but your urine sample needs to be negative for nicotine . Please call to discuss your case >> Your weight Check your weight in the days leading up to your exam . On the day of your exam , take your shoes off , dont wear belts , empty your pockets , wear light clothing . IMORTANT Make sure you ask the examiner what your weight is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to weigh you again . >> Your height Stand up straight just like Mom told you to . IMPORTANT Ask the examiner what your height is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to check again . >> Avoid Caffeine on Exam day Caffeine elevates your blood pressure . Avoid it for at least a few hours prior to exam . >> Cholesterol TIP Eat plenty of oatmeal and bananas in the week leading up to your exam and lay off the sweets and other cholesterol elevating foods . >> Exercise TIP If you exercise , do NOT exercise on the morning of your exam . Exercise may artificially raise your blood pressure . >> Water Drink lots of water to flush out your system leading up to the exam .
It depends on the size of the policy . On average it would be a paramedical exam , blood pressure , height weight , health questions , and blood , urine or saliva depending on the company . A larger policy may require a full doctors physical with a stress test and the blood and urine .
Yes , all carriers require a urine and blood test when applying for life insurance . The lab results are reviewed to check for drug use along with other tests such as cholesterol , blood sugar , liver enzymes , etc. . There are guaranteed issue or simplified issue policies that may not require blood or urine samples , but there are questions asked about drug use on the application that must be answered .
Most life insurance companies use companies called parameds , which dispatch nurses to collect medical history and health data . Besides registering height , weight , blood pressure , they collect blood and urine samples . These samples are tested for common diseases and drugs including nicotine , prescription and illegal drugs . Even on smaller cases where blood and urine samples are not warranted they will sometimes use a mouth swab or hair sample especially if there is any type of suspicion of drug use .
It 's going to depend on how much you want to pay for the insurance ? Depending on the state you can get around 250,000 in coverage without providing blood or urine , but it will cost a great deal and you will still be subject to your medical history in review . An insurance `` physical '' in the vast majority of cases is stepping on a scale , having your blood pressure taken , Pluse , answering health questions both current and past . Providing a blood sample and a urine sample and that 's about it . 30-45 minutes . So you can get a fair amount of coverage without meeting wtih an examiner , but you 'll pay the highest possible rate to do so . What you have to figure out is avoiding a 45 minute meeting worth years of overpaying for coverage ?
When purchasing an underwrittenlife insurance policy , the underwriters will order a paramed exam . A paramed or nurse will come to you take the health history part of the application . They usually will require a urine sample and blood sample along with height/weight , blood pressure , etc. . The urine is tested for nicotine . A person should be away from smoking , dipping , patches gumor chewing tobacco for an extended period of time to avoid a smokers rating on their life insurance .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Which Home Insurance Is Best In California ?
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
The best home insurance is the policy that pays the maximum allowable with the least hassle when you have a claim . Every other measure becomes meaningless . The way to have this best policy is to work honestly with a trusted insurance agent , which is someone who will listen to you , provide good financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . The most important advice will be on setting limits for coverages . There are various limits and each deserves careful consideration . In the end the premium means very little if the coverage is not complete when you have damage .
All auto insurers in California are subject to prop 103 laws and guidelines . This means a DUI is chargeable for 3 years , however the person in question with the DUI will not be a California good driver for 10 years . California good driver is a 20 % discount that would not be available by any Insurer operating in California . Not being a good driver in California can potentially make you unacceptable by certain carriers that will only accept California good drivers . Work with many Insurers including Allied and depending on your situation Allied most likely will accept you as an insured but you will not get the good driver discount .
The best life insurance in California is the one that best suits your needs . If you have a health problem , there are a number of companies in California that specialize in impaired risk life insurance . If you have perfect health , there are many good companies that will charge you within a few dollars of one another . The best way to find out your best life insurance is to call an agency , explain your health and the purpose of your life insurance , and let them guide you through some choices . There are many agencies that serve California on the internet or you can look in the Yellow Pages .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
The California Department of Insurance -LRB- aka the California Insurance Commissioner 's Office -RRB- . If you are having problems with an insurer you can contact the department at 800-927-4357 if you are within the state of California or 213-897-8921 if you are outside of the state of California . You can also use their contact form , which can be found here : WEBSITELINK
Insurance is regulated by state . Each state can adopt a different approach to the issue that you have raised . In California , the voters took rating matters into their own hands with a constitutional amendment . Sex or gender , as you say , is not a rating factor in California . That means that in California if you switch sex , switch back and switch again , nothing will change as long as you are residing in California , and driving a car insured in California .
Actually California has some of the most competitive auto rates in the country due to Prop 103 . While everything else in California is expensive my clients are often pleasantly surprised that the auto insurance rates in California are not sky high . In California we have a different set of rules governed by the Prop 103 law that heavily regulates the rates in California and what an insurance carrier can charge . Insurance rates are not credit based but are heavily rated on your driving record and driving history .
It varies by state . In California you are only required to carry the amount of coverage needed to rebuild your dwelling -LRB- home -RRB- not what a lender requires . In California home values are often much higher then the actual construction costs of a home so meeting a lender requirement can mean over insurance you home in many cases . Of course this depends on the market you are living in .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
In answering this question , we assume that CDL is an abbreviation for California Drivers License . If you are a California resident seeking to purchase Auto Insurance , it is assumed that you would have a California Drivers License thus not a method of lowering your insurance premium.The State of California allows insurance companies to base auto insurance premium rates on the experience of the driver ; thus the longer you are licensed , your premium would be lower . However , your driving record would be equally important as this would be another method of adjusting rates on a policy . We 'll be happy to answer any more specific questions if and when asked !
Home insurance is not legally mandatory in any State including California . If a mortgage contract exists against the home , it is likely that the mortgagee requires at least a basic Fire & Lightning policy on the home to protect the collateral security for the mortgage . If on the other hand , there is no mortgage , it would not be adviseable for one to take the risk of fire or personal liability alone . One may purchase a Homeowners Insurance policy with a very high deductible thus generating a comparatively much lower rate in order to have coverage should a major catastrophe occur . Arizona , California & Nevada free quotes are available online at : WEBSITELINK
In California the answer is anabsoluteyes . California is governed by proposition 103guidelinesand one of the major rating factors is driving record . Every personal lines auto insurance carrier must rate according to your driving record so 1 point will have an impact . This impact can be quite significant . 2 points in a 3 year period and you are no longer considered a California a good driver . This can cause rates to easily double in many cases . I often see clients who move in from out of state who have points on their driving record get a big shock to find out there rates areaffectedby a ticket . So what is a point you may ask . Any minor moving violation is 1 point . A major moving violation can be 2 points with a DUI coming in at 4 points . A minor at-fault accident is 1 point . A at-fault accident that includes bodily injury is 2 points . You may attend traffic school for a minor violation in most areas once every 18 months . All the rest you just have to wait out the 3 years until the points drop off your record . Also some insurance carriers reward drivers for clean driving records that go beyond 3 years so even though your points may have dropped off you still may not be receiving the best rates possible until 5-7 years . And by the way , Insurance carriers in California will check the driving record once a year minimum if not more often . If you move from one carrier to the next an upfront motor vehicle record is always ran .
Auto insurance rates in California are not as high as you may think , in many areas . Regarding which company has the best rates , it depends on several factors including the type of car , your age , driving record and coverages . As experienced brokers , we research and compare all of the best prices from the top-carriers so you can easily get a free quote on our website . It pays to shop , and there 's no cost . California prices are often very competitive .
Every year , make and model of automobile is assigned a specific symbol . The symbols are alphabetical . The symbol tracks the experience the industry and the company have with that particular year , make and model . As you can imagine a manufacturer like Mercedes Benz has a wide variety of symbols . The symbol is but a part of the computation of the premium . The insurance companies in California are restricted to a few criteria to further evaluate the risk . The California insurers will look at the driving record of every driver in the household and will assess points if there are violations present , particularly with the assigned driver . The points based upon a drivers record have a compounding effect because in California a driver with less than two points is considered a good driver and awarded a substantial discount . Another factor that influences the company is the presence of inexperienced drivers . The accident record of the household is also considered closely . Claims for bodily injury receive a great deal of scrutiny . Most points given for accidents or violations remain on the driving record for three years . Racing and DUI convictions remain on the record for ten years . In California the distance you driver your Mercedes Benz each year is also a part of the computation . Services are available to insurance companies that track your mileage every time the vehicle is serviced . These services project you annual mileage and companies use bands of factors to develop the final premium . There are a few additional factors considered such as location where the car is being garaged , and occupation of the drivers in the household , Most automobile insurance is rated by a computer with little additional input from a live underwriter or agent . All of this information is used to compile a premium that the insurance company considers adequate for the risk . If approved by the computer , the agent is authorized to issue the policy and subject to potential additional review , the policy is in force .
Cost of homeowners insurance in California is based on location , replacement cost of the dwelling which would entail putting together all the characteristics of the home . Past claims experience and potential discounts you may qualify for . A California independent agent like myself could help you find the right insurance carrier at the right premium to fit your needs .
When you are convicted of a DUI you will be required to notify the DMV of your financial responsibility . That will trigger a reaction by your insurer . They will know immediately that you have been convicted of DUI . What they do at that point will vary . At renewal you will find that you have been assessed points for the DUI and those points will trail you for 10 years in California . In California you will also lose your good drivers discount . Sometimes clients think that this is the time to shop for auto insurance . Unless you simply can not pay the premium , dropping coverage at this stage is not in your best interests . Your existing insurance company is likely to treat you with more consideration than any subsequent insurance company . By the time you pay the fine , pay for the drivers education course and face the doubling of your auto premiums you will determine that drinking and driving does not pay in California .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is VGLI Term Life Insurance ?
Yes , VGLI is Term Life Insurance . Veterans Group Life Insurance is renewable for life , with rates going up in five year bands . E.g. . At age 29 , $ 100,000 of coverage costs $ 8/mo . At age 75 , $ 100,000 costs $ 450/mo , at rates set in 2008 . It is able to be converted to a commercial permanent policy , if desired .
The requirements for receiving VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance recently changed -RRB- . For those retiring from the service before Nov 1 , 2012 , you must apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . At this point in time , you will need to answer some health questions to be eligible to get the policy . You also need to have been on SGLI while you served , in order to qualify for VGLI . If you retired after Nov 1 , 2012 . you have 240 days to apply for VGLI without answering health questions . If you miss that deadline , you can get VGLI with evidence of good health if you apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . Again , you must be on SGLI at the time you left the service , in order to qualify for VGLI . Others who can get VGLI are the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard . If you do not fit any of these categories , or do not wish to go that route , veterans can get an individual policy from private companies . Some of the health conditions that , unfortunately , can hit veterans disproportionately high are hepatitis , PTSD , diabetes , and others . Going to a company that specializes in any health conditions you might have will be a big help .
If you have a health condition that makes it difficult to get life insurance elsewhere , you have recently separated from the service , and are eligible to get Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- without having to answer medical questions , I think VGLI is a very good deal . If you are very healthy and able to get similar rates elsewhere , I would advise to lock in your premium for a longer period of time than Veterans Group Life Insurance locks them in . However , since the rate reduction in 2008 , VGLI premiums are good and it may be hard to beat them . You might want to purchase a permanent policy elsewhere along with taking VGLI Term to cover all your life insurance bases .
VGLI stand for Veterans Group Life Insurance and is life insurance for persons who have served in the uniformed services . It is Term life insurance that can go up in price at regular intervals . Neither SGLI or VGLI is available in Whole Life and can not be converted to Whole Life . To get permanent coverage you would want to purchase a private policy .
To apply for Veterans Life Insurance , you can go to the benefits.va.gov website . However , keep in mind that you must apply for VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- shortly after departing from the service . You are only qualified for VGLI by converting SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to it within a certain time frame .
Unfortunately , veterans do not get any life insurance unless they have met certain conditions . These are the major ones : 1 -RRB- Before Nov , 2012 - You must have been receiving SGLI and applied for VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days of separating from the service , or you have a year and 120 days to apply if you can show good health . 2 -RRB- After Nov , 2012 - Same as above but substitute 240 days for 120 days 3 -RRB- You are a member of the Individual Ready Reserve Unit or Inactive National Guard . If you are eligible for VGLI you can get up to $ 400,000 or the amount that you had in SGLI , whichever is lower .
Yes , VGLI is Term Life Insurance . Veterans Group Life Insurance is renewable for life , with rates going up in five year bands . E.g. . At age 29 , $ 100,000 of coverage costs $ 8/mo . At age 75 , $ 100,000 costs $ 450/mo , at rates set in 2008 . It is able to be converted to a commercial permanent policy , if desired .
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
The military offers their own group life insurance policy called SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- . Servicemembers are automatically issued $ 400,000 of life insurance at a very reasonable cost , but they can choose to take a lower amount , or decline it altogether . Upon leaving the service , they can convert it to VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- if they do so within a certain time frame .
When servicemembers separate from the service , they have the opportunity to convert their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be done within a short time . If a veteran is looking for life insurance after some years of being out of the service , there is not a VA policy especially for them , but they can get private life insurance as can anyone of that age group .
Unfortunately , Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is a lifetime renewable Term policy without cash value . Therefore , you would not be able to borrow from Veterans Group Life Insurance because it does not have any cash value or pay any dividends .
Unless a service person gets Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- within a year from separating from the service , their Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- will end and they will need to get a private policy . Contact an agency or website that carries several products to choose from to find the best rate for Veteran 's life insurance .
There is life insurance for veterans provided by the VA called VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be purchased shortly after separation from the service . If getting a private policy , a veteran can get any life insurance policy that anyone else can get , as long and age and health guidelines are met .
The VA does offer life insurance for Veterans , but there are narrow guidelines as to who can get it . If you are currently retiring from active service , you must apply to change your SGLI to VGLI within 120 days -LRB- you can wait one year longer with evidence of good health -RRB- . You can also get Veterans Group Life Insurance if you are a member of the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard , or were disabled as a result of such service .
Servicemans Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- is a federal program . It replaced a program instituted during World War II that proved to be one of the best benefits servicemen could have . SGLI is available to all service personnel but ceases when they leave active duty . Veterans group Life insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is a similar , however , more costly program for servicemen who have left active duty .
You can go to the following link to see how much Veterans Group Life Insurance costs : WEBSITELINK . Unlike SGLI , which has a set price per thousand dollars of coverage , VGLI costs vary according to age , so I am unable to provide one set answer for you .
You will automatically be enrolled in $ 400,000 of life insurance when you enter the service . If you want less , you can decrease it by increments of $ 50,000 . After you are out of the service , there is a window of time where you must convert your SGLI to VGLI , or you will lose the opportunity to do so . See WEBSITELINK for details .
Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is five year renewable Term life insurance for persons who have served in the uniformed services . to convert SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI , you must do so within 120 days of your separation from the service . If you wait longer than the 120 days , you have one additional year , but then you must show evidence of good health to be approved .
The SGLI that is offered by the VA -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- is Term insurance . However , it will stay in effect until you are discharged from the service . At that time , you can convert it to VGLI , which is also term insurance , but can be renewed for the lifetime of the insured person .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Count Net Worth ?
If your question is about applying for life insurance , the answer is yes . An underwriter will want to know your net worth along with your annual income and time in your current occupation . This information is needed in addition to height , weight , age , place of residence , health , medical history and lifestyle . All of these factors are used to calculate your mortality . If your question is about counting life insurance as an asset in your net worth , the answer is maybe . If you have term life insurance , then no , the face amount is not counted as an asset . However if you have a cash value plan , yes the current cash value of your whole life or universal life insurance is part of a person 's net worth . .
I 'm not sure that the asker wa n't asking if life insurance counts toward your personal net worth . If that is the question , the death benefit does not count because it has no value unless you are dead . So while you are living it adds zero to your net worth . However the cash value built up in a whole-life policy definitely adds to your net worth . That is your money just the same as money in a bank account .
As mentioned previously , while net worth is a factor , income is the primary determinant for underwriting the amount of life insurance coverage allowed -LRB- applied for plus inforce amounts -RRB- . Above age 70 , net worth is very important in determining maximum coverage allowed . Net worth , income and the premium for the requested coverage are considered together using different formulas . Generally , the maximum total coverage allowed will be 50 % of net worth .
Life Insurance Applications often ask about Net Worth . They do so because they want to ensure that a person is over insuring themselves needlessly -LRB- or maliciously -RRB- . But for most people on most policies Net Worth does n't matter too much . Most of the time people have enough Income to justify the amount of Life Insurance they ask for .
I 'm not sure that the asker wa n't asking if life insurance counts toward your personal net worth . If that is the question , the death benefit does not count because it has no value unless you are dead . So while you are living it adds zero to your net worth . However the cash value built up in a whole-life policy definitely adds to your net worth . That is your money just the same as money in a bank account .
If your question is about applying for life insurance , the answer is yes . An underwriter will want to know your net worth along with your annual income and time in your current occupation . This information is needed in addition to height , weight , age , place of residence , health , medical history and lifestyle . All of these factors are used to calculate your mortality . If your question is about counting life insurance as an asset in your net worth , the answer is maybe . If you have term life insurance , then no , the face amount is not counted as an asset . However if you have a cash value plan , yes the current cash value of your whole life or universal life insurance is part of a person 's net worth . .
Does life insurance count towards net worth ? Well , it depends on who 's doing the counting . Normally , the cash values of a life insurance policy could be included in net worth calculations , but usually not the death benefit . Now , in dealing with estate tax planning the life insurance death benefit is included as part of the taxable estate value . This is based on ownership of the policy . If the policy is owned by a trust or another person , it is not counted against the estate .
Only the cash value of permanent policies you own counts toward your net worth while the insured person is alive . If you receive a death benefit as beneficiary of a life insurance policy , then the entire amount that you received does count toward your net worth for financial planning purposes .
That is a great question ! As a rule , while you are living , the benefit amount is not since the face value of the policy is not an asset that you personally will be able to use . The death benefit is an intangible asset , until you pass , and assuming that you have a named beneficiary , will not become a part of your estate , but will increase the amount of what your total net worth was . If you have a large cash value in a policy , that is counted in your net worth , and Medicaid will count that cash as an asset , so you may want to consult with your advisor if this is the reason for asking the question . Thanks for asking !
Cash Value life insurance is a financial asset and as such is included in your Net Worth Statement . While you are living if the policy has a net cash surrender value it would count as an asset . The insurance amount is not payable until you die so it is not included in your Net Worth . It is included as part of your legacy or estate . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . .
Net worth is a financial statement that includes the summary of assets minus liabilities . Cash value permanent life polices that have accumulated cash value are part of the asset side of the balance sheet . The death benefit part of life insurance is unrealized prior to death and is not counted as part of the net worth statement .
Net worth usually only counts the current cash value in life insurance , and not the face amount , when figuring net worth for obtaining school loans , filling out financial records , etc. . That is the only cash value that is accessible in life insurance before death . There may be situations where the face amount is counted but it would be specified as that .
I like Jim Winkler 's answer above , `` in the regard that you have some peace of mind having some limited insurance coverage '' a term life policy could be considered an `` asset '' , but really not in any financial way . As Peggy said even if you are the beneficiary of someone 's term life policy you ca n't count it as an asset in terms of figuring your net worth in a financial statement or to borrow against . You can buy a credit term policy to cover a debt in the case of your death , but it still is n't counted as an asset . Again , I 'm with Jim - I do n't value or recommend Term life policies generally . They have their place in some situations , but more of a last resort in my opinion .
As mentioned previously , while net worth is a factor , income is the primary determinant for underwriting the amount of life insurance coverage allowed -LRB- applied for plus inforce amounts -RRB- . Above age 70 , net worth is very important in determining maximum coverage allowed . Net worth , income and the premium for the requested coverage are considered together using different formulas . Generally , the maximum total coverage allowed will be 50 % of net worth .
While you are alive , just the cash value of your life insurance policy is included in your net worth . If you only own term life insurance , you would not count that policy at all in your net worth . After you pass away , the death benefit paid out from all types of policies are included in the value of your estate .
This is a very vague question given that we do not know who you are , so please forgive these general answers . My analysis always starts with two things , what does your driving history look like and what is your net worth ? Driving History : this will reveal number of years driving , accident/violation history and how much you currently drive . This is important because if you are a very safe driver who has been driving for many years I would recommend a higher deductible -LRB- since it has never been used -RRB- . However , if you have a history of accidents then I would recommend a lower deductible since it will be used more often and higher property damage limits -LRB- in case you damage something other than another vehicle -RRB- . Net Worth : if you have a high net worth then I would recommend a larger bodily/physical injury limit . The reason for this is in case you seriously injure someone you will get sued . If you have lower limits then the insurance company is going to cut you a check and walk away . However , if you are insured for lets say $ 1,000,000 bodily/physical injury , then the insurance company will more than likely step in and work on settling the amount . After these factors have been considered I go over additional coverage -LRB- rental cars , rental reimbursement , coverage forms -RRB- and lastly pricing . I hope this helps .
Life Insurance Applications often ask about Net Worth . They do so because they want to ensure that a person is over insuring themselves needlessly -LRB- or maliciously -RRB- . But for most people on most policies Net Worth does n't matter too much . Most of the time people have enough Income to justify the amount of Life Insurance they ask for .
I am working on a case right now in which my client has applied for 11 policies . Here is the breakdown : He is a partner in one business with two other fellows . They have just completed a buy-sell agreement and are funding the agreement with life insurance . Per the advice of their accountant and their attorney , they are purchasing several policies to cover both the current and the anticipated future value of the business . One policy will be owned by the business , and four other policies will be owned by a trust . That gives us five policies so far . My client is also a partner in a second business , with another fellow . They are following the same funding strategy . That business will own one policy , and the trust will own an additional four . Our count is now up to 10 policies . But these policies take care only of business needs . My client is also married with children . He needs life insurance for family protection . So he is purchasing yet another policy for their benefit . That gives us 11 . The underwriter is fine with this set up . My client can justify the need for all policies financially . All policies have been deemed appropriate with regard to the financial needs of the business and the financial needs of his family . And you know what ? He could buy more if he wanted to . Lets suppose he supported a number of charities . They could be religious , or social service , or political . He could take out a separate policy for each of their benefit . Five charities , five more policies . But we have another consideration . What if his net worth is over $ 5 million , and he wants to preserve his estate for his heirs ? What if he wants to avoid forcing his family to liquidate his assets just to pay Uncle Sams estate tax bill ? He could buy life insurance to cover the tax bill . Another policy . We are not done yet :-RRB- . What if his parents were financially dependent on him . It happens . What if his premature demise would put them in financial straits ? He could buy life insurance on himself for their benefit , so they could be well taken care of . Do you realize that in this scenario , this one client could take out 20 or so policies ? And it would all be financially justified and appropriate . How do you like that ? Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
The cash value of your life insurance would be part of your net worth . The death benefit of you life insurance would not be included in your net worth . It would be included as part of your estate . An independent life insurance broker , who represents several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The amount of life insurance needed is really only limited by the income and assets being protected , insurability and the capacity to pay premiums . The maximum coverage most insurers will consider for someone under age 45 will be 25 times earned income . The earned income multiples grade down as you age . At older ages , net worth plays a bigger role in establishing maximum coverage . As for who would `` need '' the most , consider that ultra high net worth individuals will continue to buy life insurance for estate planning purposes as their wealth grows to deal with estate liquidity issues . At some point , insurer retention limits and reinsurance capacity limits are reached such that the theoretical limit of US life insurance coverage on an eligible life is about $ 250 million .
end question
start question
annuities
Is Annuity A Security ?
Tax deferred annuities have three basic crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub accounts crediting with equity and bond instruments . Separate sub accounts are used in variable annuities and are classified as a security product -LRB- FINRA -RRB- as well as an insurance product -LRB- Department of Insurance . -RRB-
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
An annuity is a savings or investment product depending upon the definition of an annuity such as security product like variable annuities versus a non-security fixed annuity product . An IRA is an individual retirement account which is a qualified plan and not product that can hold investments as well as insurance products like annuities . A qualified plan in and of itself is an IRS code permitting special tax treatment but without a product is an empty economic storage bin . An annuity is a product , which can be in a qualified plan or remain a non-qualified annuity . Strictly on the basis of the question , Is An Annuity Better Than An IRA ? Yes , an annuity is better than an empty shell .
Some advisers use invest for securities and save for non-securities . You can invest or save from your cash flow on a monthly basis or pay a lump sum deposit into an annuity . For investors : variable annuities , a security , are a mid to long term investment when utilizing market equities and bonds via the separate sub accounts . Know your liquidity needs before investing and risk tolerance profile because you can lose money with variable annuities . For savers : fixed interest rate or indexed annuities , both non-securities , are short to midterm savings options . Know your liquidity needs before making a product purchase .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
A variable annuity like a fixed annuity allows the owner to accumulate money on a tax deferred basis . Both types of annuities allow the owner to select a lifetime income to settle the contract . There are variations of that privilege but that is the basic benefit . The accumulation of money for the fixed annuity is guaranteed by the insurance company issuing the policy . The accumulation of money for the variable annuity allows the owner to select from a group of accounts , some of which are tied to publicly traded securities . The insurance company does not guarantee those securities that are tied to publicly traded securities .
Is a variable annuity a security ? Yes , a variable annuity is subject to the same rules and oversight of the SEC that a security would be . A person selling variable annuities must be securities registered and comply with all the transaction rules established by FINRA and the SEC . One other thing to think about if you 're considering a variable annuity is that the RISK in type of product is more along the lines of a stock purchase than a nonqualified product like a fixed annuity .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Variable Annuities are a security . The Security Exchange Commission has jurisdiction over the filings . FINRA oversees the distribution practices of variable annuities . Licensed registered representatives must have a series 6 and 63 to sell variable annuities . Some variable group annuities are not considered securities in certain states . Check with the department of insurance in your state to confirm .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
That is an excellent question !! Many people become confused by this type of annuity because of it 's connection to the stock market . The annuity does have it 's performance linked to the performance of the market , but it does not involve any particular stock . Your annuity gains based upon the gains that the aggregate market gains , not ant particular stock . For example , your annuity bases its gains on the S&P 500 . If the S&P 500 rises from point a to point b , your annuity credits your fund with a promised gain . You have not purchased any stock , nor are you participating in the market . You are just `` gambling '' on its performance . Since there is no stock investment , it is not considered a security , unlike a variable annuity , which does invest in the market , and therefore is considered a security . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
Prudential Annuities is a business of Prudential Financial , Inc. . The annuities that are sold by Prudential include variable annuities , fixed annuities , immediate income annuities , and modified guaranteed annuities -LRB- also called market adjusted annuities -RRB- . You can call any agency that sells Prudential products to discuss . Variable annuities can only be sold by someone with securities licenses .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Plastic Surgery Covered By Health Insurance ?
The new ACA -LRB- Affordable Care Act -RRB- covers many additional expenses that were not previously covered . Plastic surgery is typically covered on most 2014 plans if it is a result of an illness or injury . Cosmetic surgery can be covered in many ways , depending on the company and plan you choose . As experienced brokers , we shop the top-rated companies and find the policies that provide the coverage you need . Under new legislation , there are no medical questions or physicals , and your acceptance is virtually guaranteed .
Essentially all health insurance plans will cover some forms of plastic surgery . The crucial distinction that the consumer must understand is the difference between reconstructive plastic surgery and cosmetic plastic surgery . For example , accidents , burns from fires or chemicals , and some cancer treatments trigger the medical necessity criteria necessary for restoring or at least improving the normal functions of an individual . This is totally different than you deciding you would feel better about yourself if you had your favorite movie star 's nose or breasts . That would be a purely cosmetic procedure with no bearing on your physical health -LRB- if fact , you are actually putting your physical health at risk -RRB- . If you want to pay to look like a real life Barbie Doll then go for it but your health insurance company loves you just the way you are .
Medicare does not generally cover plastic surgery for cosmetic reasons . Medicare will cover plastic surgery if it to restore a part of the body damaged due to injury , or to regain function of a malformed body part . It will also pay for breast prosthesis after mastectomy for breast cancer .
The new ACA -LRB- Affordable Care Act -RRB- covers many additional expenses that were not previously covered . Plastic surgery is typically covered on most 2014 plans if it is a result of an illness or injury . Cosmetic surgery can be covered in many ways , depending on the company and plan you choose . As experienced brokers , we shop the top-rated companies and find the policies that provide the coverage you need . Under new legislation , there are no medical questions or physicals , and your acceptance is virtually guaranteed .
Medical treatment to enhance the appearance is generally not covered by any medical insurance . Treatment to correct damaged skin is generally covered , particularly when it is medically required . In an interview with a plastic surgeon , I was told that it is difficult for them to draw the line as some repairs lapse into cosmetic surgery . For example , surgery on the eyelid can increase the beauty of the eye but it can also help a person from having strikes to their head from low objects such as cabinets .
Blepharoplasty is a type of reconstructive -LRB- plastic -RRB- surgery used as a treatment for drooping eyelids . These `` eyelid lifts '' could be a covered item as long as the surgery is not simply for cosmetic reasons . Your doctor needs to justify the need by measuring the `` droop '' and a visual test must be conducted to prove your vision is impaired .
Generally speaking , health insurance will cover plastic sugery that is deemed medically necessary by your primary care physician . Septoplasty , which is used to correct a deviated septum , will depend on the severity of the deviation . For minor cosmetic correction , the health insurer will likely not cover the procedure . For serious deviations that cause additional problems , health insures will typically cover the procedure .
Full coverage disability covers accidents on and off the worksite . It also covers periods of sickness . It can also cover specific vocational skill sets like a medical doctor who also is a plastic surgeon under owner occupation terms of the disability policy . Some disability policies have certain nuances in their policy definitions that could be unique to your situation .
Medicare will cover a breast reduction , but you 'll need to meet the guidelines . Unlike private insurance where you get pre-authorized , you 'll need to meet these specific guidelines : Individual weight of the breasts Amount to be removed A big problem you 'll run into is that breast reductions are performed by plastic surgeons and many do not accept medicare coverage . Begin this conversation with your surgeon from day 1 to assure you 're using the correct physician .
Window glass damage is covered under your Comprehensive portion , yes . Your deductible would apply , unless you have endorsed `` Full Glass Coverage '' onto your policy . Some insurance companies may require , or strongly suggest that you have the work done within a specific network . The law in CT was just recently changed , however , and now we are free to have the work done by anyone we so choose . This `` Fuill Glass '' endorsement only applies to window glass , and is limited specifically to glass . Further , it does not apply to clear plastic sheeting that is comonly found in Jeeps for example .
You want to obtain the maximum coverage for your paycheck allowable by the disability insurance company . If you are a professional with occupational skill sets , you should consider own occ disability insurance like a plastic surgeon for example . If you have the discretionary funds , you may also consider disability insurance for your retirement plan .
Having a pool may add additionalpremiumto your homeowner 's insurance but the amount will vary depending on who the company is . You will always be required to have the pool area properly fencedin with the appropriate security measures for others , especially children . Of course , a plastic `` kiddie '' pool will not cost extra !
Most eye surgery is covered by your health insurance plan if the surgery is considered medically necessary . Surgery designed to correct vision that could otherwise be handled with eyeglasses or contacts is normally not a covered expense . If the patient has cataracts that are severe enough as to inhibit vision , your health insurance plan will normally cover surgery . You should consult your eye doctor and insurance carrier before assuming eye surgery is a covered expense .
Medicare and other health insurance policies will cover blepharoplasty surgery if there is a medical need for corrective surgery . Blepharoplasty is sometimes done for cosmetic reasons . In those cases , surgery would not be covered by Medicare . Your opthalmologist will measure the degree of eyelid droop and can advise you if surgery would be covered by Medicare or not .
A medical exam for the coverage typically consists of a paramedical exam -LRB- height/weight check and vitals checks such as pulse and blood pressure readings -RRB- , a blood test , and a urine test - sometimes an EKG and/or cognitive testing may be required for older age individuals -RRB- . Even if it 's not asked specifically on the application itself , the carrier will see the input regarding the wls -LRB- I 'm assuming stands for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- surgery in the APS from your doctor . For any fully underwritten life insurance program , the carrier will request a copy of an APS from your doctor , in addition to the completion of a medical exam conducted for the insurance policy -RRB- . An APS is an Attending Physician Statement - in short , it 's a doctor 's summary of your medical history records . For example , if you were being treated for diabetes , it would cite your A1C reading history , prescriptions prescribed for the condition , when it was diagnosed , etc. . In the APS , the carrier will see in the doctor 's notes that you have discussed getting the wls surgery -LRB- I 'm assuming that `` wls '' is supposed to stand for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- and ask if a surgery has been scheduled and/or completed . If it has n't been completed yet , a carrier will postpone approving you for the coverage because you have an outstanding medical procedure on the books that 's still supposed to get done . From a carrier 's perspective , their risk of a claim is greatly increased when they know a surgical operation is upcoming as complications can always occur during any surgery . Please note , after a weight loss surgery procedure and you 've ideally lost a large amount of weight and want to apply for coverage , part of that weight loss can be added in to a carrier 's calculation of height/weight profile . The reason for this is quick weight loss for people -LRB- whether via surgery , diet and exercise , liposuction , etc. -RRB- can often result in some individuals gaining a percentage of that weight back - unfortunately not everyone always keeps all of the pounds off . So if you apply for coverage within 12 months of that rapid weight loss , a carrier may add half the weight loss amount back to your total . For example , if you weight 300 pounds and loss 120 pounds after a procedure , now you 're sitting at 180 pounds . If you applied for coverage soon after having lost that 120 pounds , the carrier would add 60 back to your total and base the underwriting on a height/weight profile of 240 pounds -LRB- 180 +60 -RRB- . The purpose of the 12 month differential is to show stability in the person 's weight loss and that they have a good chance of keeping off the weight . Please also note , alternative options will still result in the same outcome -LRB- e.g. non-medical life insurance -RRB- because a question on almost every application will ask in some format `` are there any outstanding tests or other medical procedures outstanding or waiting to be completed '' . You would only be able to secure a graded policy with a low face amount -LRB- $ 25k or $ 50k maximum -RRB- , which does not appear to be in the ballpark of the coverage you 're looking to secure -LRB- you noted $ 900k in your question 's statement -RRB- . If you have a policy already in force , you can elect to convert all or a portion of it to permanent coverage . The conversion would keep the risk class that the original policy had and would simply just calculate the rates based on your age . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , Medicare Part A does cover medically necessary cataract surgery , if you must be admitted to the hospital for the surgery to be performed . If on an outpatient basis , cataract surgery is covered by Medicare Part B. Medicare Part B will cover one pair of eyeglasses following the cataract surgery .
As a general rule you should never have an expectation that any health insurance policy will cover cosmetic surgery , at least in the context that most people think of cosmetic surgery . Cosmetic surgery merely for the purposes of enhancing a person 's physical appearance will be an exclusion under individual and group health insurance policies . The possible exception to this rule would be in the circumstances where cosmetic surgery is required as a result of an illness or injury and is required to restore normal function -LRB- or as close to it as possible -RRB- . Even in these circumstances the policyholder should expect that their insurance carriers will require medical documentation as to the medical necessity for this procedure and a pre-authorization from the health insurance carrier is a virtual certainty .
It sounds like you have a decision to make : A. postpone or cancel your elective weight loss surgery so that you can get the life insurance now , or B.postpone getting life insurance until after you have your weight loss surgery . If you have found a policy for which you qualify weight wise , are not suffering health complications from your weight , and need $ 900,000 of coverage for a loan or other reason , you could probably qualify by simply postponing your surgery for a year . Of course , if your health is at risk , getting the surgery can not only help your health , but improve your life insurance rates in the future .
Medicare will pay for lap band surgery if the patient 's BMI is over 35 , if the surgery has been deemed medically necessary due to other failed treatment , if there has been a psychological evaluation indicating that lap band surgery could be successful , and if the obesity has existed for some time . One of the keys as to whether Medicare will pay for lap band surgery is if there exists a health condition related to the patient 's obesity . If the obese individual is not suffering from sleep apnea , type 2 diabetes , hypertension , or other weight related conditions , Medicare will not pay for lap band surgery .
In general , there are possibly three scenarios you might have in mind . If you own life insurance currently and have elective surgery , it would not cause your life insurance policy to be canceled . If you were to pass away as a result of surgery , the policy would still pay the beneficiary the policy death benefit . If you were planning to have elective surgery while in the process of applying for life insurance coverage , depending on the surgery , the insurance company may postpone making an offer to issue coverage until a period of time has elapsed from the surgery .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Should I Know About Long Term Care Insurance ?
You should know that Long Term Care Insurance can cover all levels of care : home health , assisted living , nursing home , and others . The main thing is that the triggers are met , then it will pay the benefit . The triggers include being unable to take care of one 's self in 2 or more of 6 ways , and/or mental impairment . Long Term Care Insurance offers many features that can be adjusted to get it to fit your budget . It is not taxed when collected . It allows more freedom to choose the care you want when you need it .
Long term care insurance mitigates the cost of assisted living at home as well as nursing home confinement . With the odds ever increasing that you 'll need such services because we 're living longer , it 's an important part of retirement planning . You should consider long term care insurance while you 're healthy .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
According to most sources that gather such information , the percentage of the population of the United States that owns some type of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs is around 7 % and holding . While theprobability of needing some type of extended-care for performing daily activities before death is quite high -LRB- about 1 in 4 will need up to 2 years of long-term care , slightly lower for men and higher for women -RRB- , two human factors come into play when the discussing transferring the payment of costs for such care to an insurance company : fear and denial . People are generally afraid to even consider how awful it would be to not be able to successfully perform common daily activities and need help from someone to do so . Families assume that since mom and dad took care of them as babies , they will take care of mom and dad when they need roughly the same type of attention and care . Thus , they console their elderly parents not to worry and fret about it . Others are simply in denial . `` Just take me out back and shoot me '' is a common demonstration of denial . One agent I know told me about an adult daughter that took her dad up on that . She asked , `` When should I shoot you ? '' Her father said , `` I 'll tell you when '' . So , when he started to need help getting around and the daughter offered to help , she held up a toy gun and asked , `` Now ? '' The father said , `` No , but soon . '' Of course , his condition became worse and worse until finally , he needed to be admitted to full-time care in a facility . The daughter asked again , as she had over the years , `` Do I shoot you now ? '' But , by this time , the only response her father could give was a tear . He had lost his ability to speak . Cost has become a real deterrent to the purchase of long-term care insurance . However , those that have had to go through the experience of taking care of an aged loved one usually find some way to afford at least some amount of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs . This insurance is not about the insured . It 's about the care-giver . Approximately 7 % of Americans have figured that out .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
Where Should I Buy Critical Illness Insurance In New Jersey ?
I can sell policies in New Jersey and in New York . There are many companies that offer this coverage . Some plans may be different than others however they do serve their purpose . I work with all major carriers which is best to give you the best coverages at the best rates . It is best to speak with a licensed agent to obtain a specific coverage option . I am licensed and I have many plans from the top carrier for this coverage .
It is health insurance companies that carry critical illness insurance , so you can go to any business or website that offers health insurance to find critical illness insurance in New Jersey . Anyone answering questions about critical illness insurance on this website would also be a good resource to use when going to purchase it .
Critical illness insurance provides a tax-free lump sum payment if youre diagnosed with a illness covered by your insurance policy . It can pay your mortgage , debts , or home retrofit to accommodate your medical condition . You should be able to go online to a brokerage firm that offers several critical illness policies to select the one that is right for you .
I am a Insurance Broker practicing in New Jersey , I would be more then happy to help you . I can answer any questions you have , provide you with your options , and enroll you in a plan of your choosing . Please send me an email or give me a call - Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com -LRB- 609 -RRB- -453 -4359
It is health insurance companies that carry critical illness insurance , so you can go to any business or website that offers health insurance to find critical illness insurance in New Jersey . Anyone answering questions about critical illness insurance on this website would also be a good resource to use when going to purchase it .
The answer will depend on your individual and family circumstances , objectives and resources . If you are a Breadwinner , or a stay at home parent in New Jersey chances are your significant other will be greatly impacted financially due to an untimely death . Some life insurance protection is better than none especially if you have dependents , or loved ones who are relying on your future income . Some options for life insurance in New Jersey are Group Life Insurance which may be offered by your employer , or an industry association . This is not to say group life is the best in New Jersey , it is just one of a few options . Other considerations are individual term life insurance , or permanent life insurance like whole life , universal life , variable life and indexed universal life .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
To apply for Medicare Part D in New Jersey , a good website to go to is : WEBSITELINK . There you will find some Medicare Part D plans to enroll in and how to enroll in Medicare Part D plans in New Jersey . They also provide a phone number where you can contact them to enroll in Medicare Part D.
To get Life Insurance online in New Jersey , go to a website that offers life insurance in your state . You can input your date of birth in an `` instant '' quote engine to see if a quote comes up for New Jersey , look for a site that offers life insurance in all 50 states , or put your zip code where requested . Once you get the quote . the online agency will guide you through the rest of the process . It is different for different types of policies and different companies . But in the end you have a policy just as if you had walked into a life insurance office , and you will not have had to drive anywhere or have someone in your home to purchase it .
The states that require Short Term Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York and Rhode Island . A few states offer disability to low income citizens in others ways . California , New Jersey and Rhode Island offer state Disability Insurance or Temporary State Disability Insurance . Puerto Rico also offers a Public Temporary Disability Insurance plan .
There is no one type of life insurance policy , or one particular life insurance company , that is best in New Jersey . Finding your best policy will take into account your health , age , income , the amount of life insurance that you need , and the purpose for your coverage . It may be a good idea to visit with an agency that sells life insurance in New Jersey to find the best policy for you .
Buying life insurance online in New Jersey simply involves finding an online insurance agency that does business in the state of New Jersey . You can find such resources by searching on line for agencies or agents who do business in New Jersey . You will find several places from which you can purchase life insurance online .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
Medicare is operated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- , which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services in cooperation with the Social Security Administration , it does not have a central claim-paying office for incoming claims . Rather , large insurance companies , chosen within each state , actually administer the claim payment process . So , from state to state , claim submissions are submitted to different entities . For example , claimants living in New Jersey submit claims to the New Jersey Medicare Claim Office .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Critical Illness coverages can provide money to replace lost income and to pay the expenses not coverage by your medical insurance . Studies have shown that medical insurance covers only about 40 % of the true cost of a serious disease such as disease . In addition to medical coinsurance and deductibles , there is loss of income to contend with . The person that is off sick may have disability income insurance to help with this but often the spouse has to also miss work and there is nothing to replace their income . And , if it is their child that is sick , often both will miss work with no income replacement . When you add all the additional expenses of travel , special diets , transportation , child care , etc. the additional expenses can be devastating to a family . One thing I had never thought of before I had a bout with cancer was clothing expenses . I went from 215 lbs to 140 lbs which meant i had to buy new clothes . Now that I am at 185 lbs , my fat clothes do n't fit and my skinny clothes don '' t fit so I have to buy more . Critics of Critical Illness insurance say it is not a good buy because you might have a condition that is not covered under the policy but if you bought a plan that covered every possible event , the cost would be prohibitive . However , you can buy coverage for some of the most common serious conditions at a very reasonable premium . I have never had a cancer patient tell me that their caner or CI policy was a bad buy .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
I can sell policies in New Jersey and in New York . There are many companies that offer this coverage . Some plans may be different than others however they do serve their purpose . I work with all major carriers which is best to give you the best coverages at the best rates . It is best to speak with a licensed agent to obtain a specific coverage option . I am licensed and I have many plans from the top carrier for this coverage .
The offerings will vary by State . In New Jersey , where I write most of my annuity business , and since my focus is on asset based long term care , I really like and recommend American Equity , and F&G Life , attaching the proper income riders that contain increased income for impairment .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is Needed For Renters Insurance ?
Renters insurance is a way to protect the value of your belongings in the event that they are stolen or destroyed . Let 's say there is a fire in your complex , and the apartment you live in is damaged by smoke and water from the firemen . Your cost to replace the things you own that are damaged by smoke or water is probably much greater than what you have in the bank . This is what your policy is designed to do - provide that money to replace them . If you would like more information , please click the ` contact me ' button , I 'd be glad to help !
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is available for tenants in all States . Renters Insurance Policies cover personal property , additional living expenses , personal liability and medical payments to others . Renters Insurance can be purchased by tenants renting houses , apartment units , condos and townhomes . Renters Insurance is transferrable from one rental unit to another when the insured moves ; however , it is not transferrable across State lines since policies need to be rewritten according to State Department of Insurance regulations which are different in each State . Stillwater Insurance Group offers the most affordable options for renters ; there is also an online self service renters insurance platform available directly for clients ' use : WEBSITELINK Using the above link , you may obtain a free quote and purchase your insurance contract directly online . For further questions regarding any details , you may contact a licensed representative at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Would Insurance For A Motorcycle Cost ?
That really depends upon many things including your age , where you live , and what your driving record and credit history happens to be . Certainly another factor is the year make and size of your ride . If you have your home and car insured with the same company , deeper multi policy discounts may be available that can affect your bike insurance . I am 58 , live in CT and have my home , cars , life insurance and bike insurance with the same company . I ride a 2008 Suzuki Boulevard C50 , have full coverage and high liability limits and pay $ 220 for the year for my insurance .
No , riding a motorcycle will not affect life insurance rates unless you race motorcycles . Your life insurance application will not ask whether you own or ride a motorcycle . If you do participate in motorcycle races , you will need to fill out a form that asks how many races per year , how fast you go , etc. . The rate may or may not be impacted by that information .
Riding a motorcycle does not affect your life insurance rates . Only a bad driving record -LRB- or riding record in the case of motorcycles . -RRB- if you race motorcycles it can affect your rates or even acceptance with many companies . Thank you for asking about riding a motorcycle and not driving a motorcycle . It makes me cringe when people say `` I DRIVE a motorcycle . ''
Most auto insurance companies/vehicle insurance companiesoffer a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount : typically , a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is when you have 2 or more vehicles -LRB- cars , trucks , SUVs , motorcycles ... -RRB- on the same type ofpolicy . Insurance companies usually do n't allow the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount for different types of motorized vehicles on different policies . For example - if you have a car on one policy and a motorcycle on a different policy -LRB- but both policies are with the same insurance company -RRB- then usually you would not get a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount . You would get the multi-car discountif you have 2 cars insured on the same auto insurance policy . Also , most companies that insure motorcycles will give a multi-unit discount if you insure 2 or more motorcycles on the same motorcycle insurance policy . The key point with the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is that you are usually required to have 2 or more vehicles covered on the same policy . It is always best to review with your professional independent insurance broker to find the coverage options , as well as ways to secureall availablediscounts -LRB- so you wo n't end up paying more than you have to for your insurance -RRB- .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
Car insurance is usually more expensive than motorcycle insurance because the value of the vehicle is more . Also , there is likely to be more damage in an auto accident compared to a motorcycle accident . However , there are some very expensive motorcycles on the road that do cost more to insure than many cars . Of course , these cycles are very expensive bikes .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
A stolen motorcycle is not covered under a renters or tenants policy . All coverage for a motorcycle is contained in a motorcycle policy . A renters or Tenants policy covers the personal property which specifically excludes motor vehicles . The only exception would be a motorized vehicle that is used to maintain the property and is not licensed for road use .
No , owning a motorcycle does not affect life insurance . The only time motorcycle riding affects policy rates is if the motorcycle is used in racing or stunts . Then the policy can be rated up with table ratings , have a flat extra added to it , or possibly the application can be denied coverage .
Your homeowners policy covers your personal property . In the policy definitions you will likely find that that does not include motorized vehicles of any type . There might be an exception for a vehicle used to maintain the premises -LRB- i.e. riding lawn mower . -RRB- Your motorcycle might be covered by a motorcycle policy . Coverage for loss by theft is frequently an option on motorcycle policies .
This would be the most general answer possible but over all motorcycle is less then auto . But there are many many factors that can cause rates to go either way as it pertains to usage and vehicle itself . Simple example is on the motorcycle policy you are insuring a 2012 25k in value Harley and the auto policy a 2000 Toyota Corolla . Driving experience and how the vehicles are used are determining factors . Really this is more comparing an apple to an orange .
No , I would say that owning a motorcycle will not affect your rates . The only way I see it affecting your rates is if you race your motorcycle competitively . In that case , you would need to fill out a hazardous sports questionnaire . Then the carrier would either rate up or exclude the activity .
Great Question . Usally health insurance cover you if you get hurt in a motorcycle accident . If you fall off your motorcycle and need medical attention you can go to your local hospital or urgent care and get service done . You also need to check with your health insurance company to see what is the limits and exclusion on the policy .
Your health insurance policy will cover a motorcycle accident , if it is a qualified Marketplace plan in your state . Typically , ER and other major medical expenses are part of the benefit package . A deductible and/or coinsurance may apply , depending on which tier of plans you chose . Physical damage to the motorcycle -LRB- collision and comprehensive -RRB- would only be provided on a separate policy . A federal subsidy may have been available to help you pay for coverage . Open Enrollment allows you to change plans and compare all available options . Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier Health Insurance Broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated consumer websites that offer the lowest available rates .
Most renters policies do not cover motorized vehicles , unless they are used to service the insured premises . That exception is highly limited and does not cover vehicles that are licensed or designed for use on public roads . Coverage for the theft of a motorcycle is contained in a motorcycle policy .
Yes , assuming that we are talking about normal use of a motorcycle for transportation , in that case it is no different than if you are involved in an auto accident . Your health insurance carrier will want to coordinate with any benefits you may receive for an accident under your vehicle insurance and that come sometimes lead to some frustrating back and forth between insurance companies as they argue over who pays what and when . If , you are engaging in certain types of activities with your motorcycle , especially if they are moneymaking or high risk activities you may find those activities excluded from coverage . So , if you just know you can do the Evel Kenevil jump across the Grand Canyon on national TV you had better get a special insurance policy for that kind of activity .
Absolutely not ! Workers Compensation is a state insurance required to protect workers in the event of on the job accident or workplace induced illness . So , your recreational weekend motorcycle accident would n't be covered . Workers Compensation coverage levels vary from state to state and how lost income is addressed varies accordingly . Suffice it to say , if it is possible to fit into your financial plan , purchasing disability insurance to protect your income stream in the event of serious illness or injury , regardless of source , then Short and/or Long Term Disability insurance policies are a wise precaution .
The other respondents explain that two basic triggers exist within common liability coverage policies . It is important to realize that most personal insurance - auto , home , motorcycle , rv - are based upon the occurrence trigger in the insurance policy . An occurrence is an event including repeated exposures to the same condition , that cause loss covered by the policy . You 'll understand that if the loss `` occurs '' during the policy period , the loss is coverable and a duty to defend exists until such time as it is determined after further investigation that coverage is not provided by the policy . At that time the carrier would probably extend a `` reservation of rights '' letter to you to notify you that the investigation of the loss events are revealing to the carrier that the loss is not covered for some reason contained within the policy or due to the events that occurred . Nevertheless , if the loss `` occurs '' during the period the policy was effective , and barring exclusions and limitations , their is coverage in an occurrence policy . A `` claims made '' policy changes what triggers the benefits of the policy . In the case of claims made coverage , generally only written on business and professional liability exposures , the trigger is the event and when it occurred . What is different now is that the claims must be first made during the period of coverage or a subsequent policy . If a claim is permitted to be made on subsequent policies , the chain of coverage needs to be uninterrupted and the `` retroactive '' date for coverage to be set to a point before the actual date of the loss . Claims Made policies were designed to help eliminate the chance that years and years of coverage on an occurrence policy could not be stacked one upon the other to generate large amounts of coverage . In the case of claims made policies , only the current policy limit is exposed to loss and not a stack of limits from policies covering prior annual periods . One other point that is necessary to understand . Generally , there are limitations on how long after a policy is cancelled for a claim to be presented . Occurrence policies are much more accommodating here . On the other hand , claims made policies have a limited period of time after the policy ends for a claim to be made . This is referred to as extended discovery and extended discovery on otherwise unendorsed policies is only 60 days . That is , you only have sixty days to present a claim for coverage at the end of a claims made policy . Additional extended periods of discovery are available at additional cost but each carrier may have different periods of discovery available . This feature on a claims made policy provides the `` tail '' of coverage that an occurrence policy includes without additional charge . A `` tail '' is the time beyond the period of coverage where a claim may be first reported or appear on the books of the carrier . Liability type losses can have a long `` tail '' due to the nature of the coverage and potential loss . Property losses , on the other hand , generally have short `` tails '' where the loss is not known . The reserve that the carrier must maintain within its accounting for these losses is not as the IBNR -LRB- incurred but not reported -RRB- loss reserve . Over time the carrier reduces this reserve in recognition that the further past the end of a policy that they travel , the less likely a loss has occurred or will be reported . This should help you understand just how much must taken into account to answer your generalized question . I hope this helps answer your question .
It may . Typically it would be by providing a discount for both policies if they are with the same carrier . Other than that I personally can not think of any other way that your car insurance would affect your motorcycle insurance . If your policies are not with the same carrier now , I would suggest talking with your local agent to find out if you could possibly get both of your policies under the same carrier .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Covered By Medicare ?
Transcranial magnetic stimulation -LRB- TMS -RRB- initial consultation should be covered by Medicare . TMS is typically used to treat some forms of depression . TMS treatment may be covered by Medicare in some situations . Check with your medical provider for details . In some cases your provider will agree to file your claim with Medicare with the understanding the claim may be denied .
Transcranial magnetic stimulation -LRB- TMS -RRB- initial consultation should be covered by Medicare . TMS is typically used to treat some forms of depression . TMS treatment may be covered by Medicare in some situations . Check with your medical provider for details . In some cases your provider will agree to file your claim with Medicare with the understanding the claim may be denied .
Medicare will cover a TENS unit , but under a specific set of circumstances . According to the Medicare guidelines,ATrans-cutaneousElectrical Nerve Stimulator -LRB- TENS -RRB- iscovered for the treatment of patients with chronic , intractable pain or acute post operative pain . Further documentation requires that medical records document the location , duration and etiology of the chronic pain . Durable medical equipment has very specific guidelines to be covered under Medicare . Make sure you check first or you could be paying a lot of money out of your own pocket . For more information on TENS please visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
There are a couple of sources you can use to find out how much Medicare will pay for a procedure such as an MRI -LRB- magnetic resonance imaging -RRB- . A good starting point is healthcarebluebook dot com and search for MRI -LRB- or any other procedure -RRB- . Another is to `` Google '' Medicare DRG rates or Medicare payment schedule .
Great question ! Unless you are using the car for a business purpose , there usually is n't a reason for the rate to be different one way or the other . If you are using the car for business , then you really want to have it insured as a business vehicle , because if you are involved in an accident and the adjuster finds that you had been using it in a company capacity , your family coverage may not be accepted . I know of several cases where the magnetic advertisement on the car caused the claim to be denied . Thanks for asking !
Vitalstim is not covered by Medicare for the treatment of dyspahgia . They have explained that the treatment is experimental and has not proven to be effective in treating swallowing difficulty . Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation -LRB- NMES -RRB- can be covered for non-neurological reasons for disuse atrophy and for walking in patients with spinal cord injury .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare can cover INR testing once a month when certain conditions are met . Typically you 'll need to consult with your doctor and have them determine if it is medically necessary and confirm with Medicare that the treatment course will be covered -LRB- would fall under Part B - your physician insurance for outpatient procedures -RRB- . Here 's a link to a publication from CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- that provides a detailed explanation regarding INR testing , what specific conditions must be met to have it covered , and how Medicare covers it : WEBSITELINK Please note , under Medicare Part B , only 80 % of the expense would be covered by Medicare . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan , it may cover some or all of the other 20 % -LRB- depending on the plan letter you have -RRB- of the service expenses . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement , please feel free to contact me to see about qualifying for one . Medicare Supplement plans are standardized , meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of which insurance carrier you have the coverage through -LRB- only the price is different ! -RRB- Even if you already have a Medicare Supplement plan , I can take a quick look to see if a lower monthly premium is available -LRB- takes less than 5 minutes and I may be able to save you a ton of money on your monthly premium -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Will Medicare Pay For A Hospital Bed ?
Medicare has specific fees for DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including wheel chairs , walkers and hospital beds . DME supplies are covered under Medicare Part B . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier and make sure they accept assignment . The hospital bed requires a doctors prescription . Your DME supplier can give you an idea of how much Medicare will pay toward the cost of renting a bed .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
Medicare has specific fees for DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including wheel chairs , walkers and hospital beds . DME supplies are covered under Medicare Part B . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier and make sure they accept assignment . The hospital bed requires a doctors prescription . Your DME supplier can give you an idea of how much Medicare will pay toward the cost of renting a bed .
Hospital beds are considered durable medical goods and are covered under Medicare Part B . If you can prove that the hospital bed is medically necessary and you have Medicare Part B then the cost of the hospital bed will be covered under medicare .
Health insurance is intended to pay for items that are medically necessary . No matter how much better a new mattress may be for any medical condition one may have , you would be hard pressed to find a physician that is going to prescribe a new bed and deem it medically necessary . And , even if you found a doctor to write such a prescription , you are going to have a very difficult time convincing an insurance company this was an true medical need , as opposed to something to help you sleep better . If you are covered by Medicare , and prescribe a hospital bed , that is covered under Medicare Part B as durable medical equipment , with you being responsible for buying 20 % of the Medicare-approved cost of a hosptial bed after your deductible has been met .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed under `` durable medical equipment '' . If you need an adjustable bed please discuss this with your doctor and alert them that you are going to purchase a bed and the company selling the bed will bill medicare so you can ask the doctor if he will certify it as being medically necessary
A Medicare swing bed is used when a patient still needs rehabilitation or skilled nursing services after a consecutive stay in an acute care hospital of at least 3 days . Medicare will pay for this stay up to 20 days in full and up to 100 days with a copay . Swing beds are located in Medicare approved small rural hospitals that offer both acute care and skilled nursing or rehabilitative care , and in Medicare approved skilled nursing facilities .
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
Medicare will pay for an in home hospital bed that has been ordered by a doctor and approved by Medicare . You generally have the option to rent or purchase the bed under Medicare part B . The regular deductible and 20 % copay apply , although a medical supplement plan can sometimes offset these costs .
One Medicare 72 hour rule is the rule that dictates that you must spend at least three days , or 72 hours , as an inpatient in the hospital before you can be discharged to a Medicare bed in a skilled nursing facility . This means three consecutive nights after being formally admitted as an inpatient . Inpatient status may not necessarily begin the first night spent in the hospital . Another Medicare 72 hour rule relates to billing . It states that services receives 72 hours before a hospitalization must be bundled into one bill .
Most DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- is covered by Medicare Part B . As for most DME 's , you must have a medical necessity for the equipment as certified by your doctor . After you have paid your Part B deductible , Medicare will pay 80 % of the allowed amount for a hospital bed and you pay the remaining balance . You should use a Medicare approved supplier that takes assignment to lower your OOP costs .
In some situations you may qualify for special beds and or mattresses . If you are completely immobile , or have a tendency towards bed sores , Medicare Part B may authorize payment for a special bed or mattress . Best to ask your doctor for advice on this matter . Be sure to use a Medicare approved DME provider and one that accepts assignment .
Medicare Part B covers hospital beds as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- - it must be prescribed for use in your home by a doctor and the doctor is enrolled in Medicare . Medicare will generally cover 80 % of the expenses with you responsible for the other 20 % . You will want to find out if the supplier accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- - if they do not , you would be responsible for any excess charges . I highly recommend securing a Plan F or G Medicare supplement to cover any excess charges .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not cover adult incontinence diapers and bed liners used at home because they are thrown away after each use , and not considered Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . If hospitalized or in a skilled nursing facility , Medicare will pay for incontinence diapers under Part A. Medicare will cover catheters .
Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- walkers , wheelchairs and power mobility devices , power lifts , oxygen , prosthetics , hospital bed , infusion pumps , nebulizers , CPAP devices for sleep apnea -RRB- . After the Part B deductible of $ 166 has been met Medicare will cover 80 % for durable medical equipment . If you have a Medicare Supplement it will pay the other 20 % .
Medicare does cover Durable Medical Equipment , however , exercise equipment would most likely not be covered . DME is most often things like wheelchairs , hospital beds , oxygen equipment , nebulizers and the like . In most cases , Medicare will pay 80 % and you would be responsible for 20 % . Depending on the plan you choose , the 20 % would be covered by your Medigap policy . To find out for sure , call 1-800-MEDICARE .
Medicare Part B covers DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including hospital beds , canes , walkers and wheelchairs . To qualify your doctor must prescribe the devices and you must use a Medicare approved DME provider . Be sure to ask if they accept assignment . The nursing homes I have visited have their own wheel chairs . I am not sure why you need or want Medicare to pay for yours .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for incontinence supplies such as adult diapers and bed pads . If the insured person is in a hospital or skilled nursing facility , those items will be covered under Medicare Part A.Otherwise , Part B will not cover them due them not being classified as durable medical equipment .
If the hospital stay that preceded your admittance into the nursing home was at least a three day stay , was for the condition that requires skilled care , and a few other stipulations , you will be admitted to a Medicare bed in the nursing home . For 20 days , all nursing home expenses are paid by Medicare . After 20 days , there is a copay until the maximum length of 100 days , at which time Medicare no longer contributes to nursing home expenses .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Disability Insurance A Good Deal ?
Disability insurance is a major part of defensive planning . Without income protection , most will have great difficulty making ends meet . The number one asset you have is the ability to produce income . Disability insurance is paycheck insurance if you cant work . Most American workers have 90 days in cash reserves . The average disability is 31 months . The odds are much greater that youll experience a disability event than dying .
As is the case with most insurance , the answer as to whether or not a product is a good deal or not can be somewhat limited based on the needs , desires , over all financial condition , and risk appetite of the policy holder in question . In other words , what may be considered a `` good deal '' for person A , may not necessarily be a `` good deal '' for person B. To some degree it is some what a matter of personal perspective .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
At least enough to cover the cost of taking care of your situation if it happens along with enough to prevent this tragedy from becoming a double whammy for the people who love you and will be the ones cleaning up your business behind you . As a young single man I carried around 50k of life insurance at 19 . Why ? I did n't want my parents who were the people who would have to take care of my stuff I left behind to suffer any financial hardship to do so . Imagine your mom , already dealing with the loss of you , having to also deal with the cost of a service for you , loss of wages from work and other costs . Long before I became an insurance agent I loved my mom enough to not want to make my death even worse for her than it could be . You can apply that thought towards anybody that loves you and will be that person or persons having to deal with your loss . Hopefully , you matter to somebody . That 's what you 're doing it for . At a minimum carry enough to account for your responsibilities and to cover the loss other people will have to take on to deal with your loss . Your loss is hard enough to the people that love you . Do n't make it worse .
To qualify for Disability Insurance , one must fill out an application and take a free insurance exam . The applicant 's health must be fairly good , and the occupation can not be extremely risky -LRB- although there are stipulations on policies to deal with most occupations -RRB- . The person applying for Disability Insurance must have an income . These factors all together qualify the applicant for Disability Insurance .
Disability insurance coverage can be deductible as a business expense , generally up to 80 % of the employees earnings . The business deduction trade off is the disability benefit is taxable to the employee . But in reality , the tax bracket during disability generally goes down , so it ultimately is a good deal for all parties .
where do I get disability insurance ? In Washington State , you 'd get it from me ! ;-RRB- What you would want to do is meet with an agent and go over your options , with a great deal of time spent on understanding the definitions of disability . With disability coverage , the definition is everything . Without a good definition , the premium may be cheap , but collecting on a claim may be hard .
Yes the military offers life insurance through -LRB- USAA -RRB- which is a good place to start being they specialize in the military . There are other companies that deal with military personnel also such as Peterson International they deal with high risk clients such as military , football players . construction workers etc. . John Cole Virtual Financial Group Recruiter / Manager Living Benefits .
If you are in good health , I believe your best option is a good whole life policy for as much as you need and can afford , it will not be very cheap but with some shopping I do believe there are affordable options . The `` final expense '' policies do have some twists if you are not careful . The majority have graduated face amounts and some just refund premiums if you were to pass away in the first few years . Have a family member help you with you decisions . Do n't just take the first `` deal through the door '' . Good luck to you and God Bless you living to 81 years old and in good health . Cheers !
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
There are no disability insurance policies that I am aware of that cover a claim for a disabling event of alcoholism . You still may find one , but I deal with the top disability insurance carriers and they all specifically exclude claims for drug and alcoholism . These are for both short term and long term disability plans .
Anyone can buy Life Insurance . The wealthy are shrewd with financial dealings . As an advisor many offers are dealing with estate preservation . They are good with investment products due to their high financial assets . They buy at a higher premium amount to accumulate more wealth as what the advantage of Life Insurance permits . At a higher payment for the policy . They can use the lump sum to keep taxes from cutting into the estate . They can cash in higher on cash values of the policy for the accumulation is higher due to the high investments . Finally , along with the lump sum millions they receive . People also can use this advantage at lower incomes if you like and would spend hundreds of dollars a month for a multi million dollar policy . It is always best to get the preferred rate at a younger age for lower premiums . My specialty .
What happens to life insurance if you change jobs ? If you 're talking about group life , the insurance stays behind , you lose it . Your group life plan may have a provision that allows you to break off your portion of the group plan , but you will find it very expensive . It is only a good deal for a person who would be declined or highly rated elsewhere . If you 're reasonably healthy it 's a bad deal . If you mean a individual policy that you `` own '' ? Absolutely nothing . It stays the same . The issue is ownership , which means who controls the policy . If you own it , you decide . If your employer owns it , they decide and they decide what 's important to offer . You 'd be surprised at the number of dental plans that do and do n't include orthodontics depending on how the owner 's kids teeth are . Never ever had an employer turn down orthodontics if their kids needed it . ;-RRB-
Cancer insurance is a very good deal when you need it . Like most other forms of insurance people will complain because they feel they are `` paying for nothing '' and say they never use the plan . This is actually a good thing . If you are receiving a direct benefit from a cancer plan this means your health is n't so good .
Life insurance is a superb tool for making your mark on the world even after you pass away . Lets suppose youre a family-first type of person . Your spouse , your kids , your grandkids mean everything to you . You want all your assets to go to them - the house , the business interest ... all the stuff you have built and accumulated and enjoyed throughout your life . If you dont take proper precautions , Uncle Sam could grab a good chunk of that when you die . But if you plan properly , it can all go to your family . And life insurance can take care of Uncle Sam . Putting life insurance in place could enable you to keep all your assets intact for posterity . And it could help you satisfy your estate tax obligations for pennies on the dollar . It is a good deal . And you know what else you could do with life insurance in your estate planning ? You could make significant donations to charity . Because the premiums are so low compared to the benefits , you could spend not a lot of money but have a huge impact on the good work of your favorite nonprofits . Think about the difference you could make in the world by helping your favorite religious/political/social / medical research group . Perhaps you could fund the research needed to in eliminate cancer . For good . All with a life insurance policy included in your estate !
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , Syndicated Financial Columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : is Indexed Universal Life a good investment ? Well , one good thing about this is , Indexed Universal Life will let you participate in indexes . It could be foreign , it could be domestic . And the good thing about that is you get some of the market potential without any of the downside risk . Keep in mind though , even though there 's no downside risk in this product , you still have policy expenses to pay based on the current price tag that the carrier is charging in the policy ; as well as , it has contractual guarantees . You have to look at both of those to see if that 's a good deal or not . But I like indexing because you get market participation without the downside risk . You just have to remember that I 'm paying for expense loads . And that money could come out tax free , depending upon how you set it up . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
This is a great topic for one peculiar reason . Many folks in the US have forced placed insurance . This is the mortgage company taking over responsibility for securing coverage when you as the property owner have failed to do so . The main problem is that forced placed insurance is usually very expensive and imposed on the least educated consumers . Take charge your life and buy your insurance wherever you find the right coverage at the right price . Be as diligent in pursuit of a '' good deal '' on your homeowners insurance as you would on auto insurance . There are substantial variations in the coverages under a homeowners policy much more so than on an auto policy : here is why : Auto insurance protects you in your involvement with others so the greatest protection is for damages , Bodily injury or Property Damage that you do to others . So you are more often dealing with third party -LRB- the first party is the you , the second party is the insurer , and the third party is the one you injure -RRB- . Section II of a homeowners policy involves third party liability , but most of the property losses in general are first party payments by the insurer . Your house is hit by a tornado , Your insurer has to respond to you ! so , look at the nuances of coverages offered by insurers . They are many : including such things as scheduled property , water and sewer back up , automatic extension of dwelling limits , law and ordinance coverage , mold remediation , and so on . If you do n't understand the coverages offered ask your agent for an example of how a coverage would be used . An educated consumer is a better consumer .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
I 'd like to add to my answer and confirm it as I have been out on Disability claim for a long while now . I am recovering from an amputation from a super infection that could not be cured with medications , so amputation became the best choice ... Let me confirm , definition is everything and when you consider a disability policy , make sure you include residual or partial disability clauses in your policy . My situation did n't start out as total disability but worked it 's way towards it . I will be honest , there is a lot of paperwork with filing a claim , but once it gets established , it gets a bit easier to deal with . Honestly , definition is everything .
I love CPA 's . They give great accounting advice and some of them even know other things . But the `` minimum limits '' advice defies his training in some important ways . What your son lacks in `` assets '' he more than makes up for in terms of `` potential '' . What I mean here is that he may not have it now , but due to his young age , he 'll have a long time to earn and pay . Even though he is only 18 does not mean that he can not be responsible for an injury or death , or damage to property , and be subjected to an order of the court to garnishee his wage to make reimbursement to those who were injured , killed , or had property damaged . Now , should have have his own insurance ? Assuming he owns the car , he probably needs his own insurance . Staying in the household under household coverage is also OK but some insurers concern themselves with the owner of the car being different than the insured on the policy so proceed with caution when the vehicle is not actually owned by the policyholder . As a practical matter , the discounts that you might enjoy are lost to the child in many cases when they have their own policy . Some companies will extend multi-policy discounts to children of the policy owner . Some discounts do n't come through this connection , however . I like kids learning the responsibility of maintaining their own insurance . It gets the loss off the parents record , for one . Parents can help subsidize the cost if they want and help provide this as a reward for good outcomes on something else . All things said and done , I like responsible children on their own policies but deal with young drivers both on and off the parents policies so it comes down to personal preference and whether you are dealing with issues that poison the whole policy because of the young driver , or not , in many cases .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What If I Start Smoking After Life Insurance ?
Nothing will happen if you start smoking after getting a life insurance policy . As long as you were forthcoming about smoking on your life insurance application , your policy will stay intact . If you ever allow the policy to lapse , you will need to get a new policy at smoker rates ; it would not be reinstated at nonsmoker rates . But if you convert it to permanent someday , that will also be at nonsmoker rates .
Other than the harmful effects it might have on your body and the decreased longevity , nothing will happen . Your life insurance policy is based on declarations that you made on a certain date . When things change after the issue date of the policy , the terms and conditions of the policy can not be altered . The same would be true of hazardous hobbies or occupations .
Fully underwritten life insurance policies require you to declare whether or not you use any tobacco products . Although cigars and pipes are smoked , the question seems to suggest cigarettes . Cigarette smoking shortens life expectancy , so smokers pay more for life insurance . If smoking is declared on the application and the life insurance company offers an underwriting decision after the due diligence process , a death claim will be paid . If the insured takes up smoking after the policy has been issued as a nonsmoker , the life insurance company will pay the claim . It is the circumvention of truth that may indeed be classified as fraud that could void the policy in certain states or reduce the death benefit based on smoker rates at the date of issue . Some occasional smokers attempt to beat the urine analysis detection of cotinine , the byproduct of nicotine , by not smoking 8-10 days before the exam banking on their body chemistry to purge the continine from their systems . But you would have to lie on the application . And again , lying on the application could be considered fraud in some states . My advice : There is one life insurance company that offers nonsmoking rates to smokers for three years in an attempt to give the insured time to quit smoking . We can help with that . But bottom line : do n't try to game the system .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
Does smoking void life insurance ? It can in one way that I know of , if you state that you are a nonsmoker when actually you are a smoker . In my state -LRB- insurance is regulated state by state , your state may be different -RRB- if you misstate your smoking status it `` can '' void the policy , even after two years . The state considers the contract null and void so just a refund of premiums . If you decide to start smoking after you 've purchased life insurance , no penalties apply .
It is amazing how a life insurance company can find out you smoke . They test urine and blood for cotinine/nicotine , if you take an exam . They usually do a phone interview if you do n't take an exam , so you have to state your smoking status both in writing and verbally . They may order medical records . I once had a client who turned out to be rated a smoker , and when I asked him about it , he said he did n't think there was any way the insurance company would find out because he did n't smoke for a month before the exam and even his doctor did not know he was a smoker . It turned out his wife had told his doctor he smoked ! He may have been able to contest that by taking a new exam , but he , of course , was back to smoking by then . If you smoke , just admit it . If you quit smoking later , you can apply for a rate reduction a year after smoking .
Unfortunately , that is too broad a question to give a specific answer . I can however , point you in the right direction . Smoking status is just one factor in assessing risks and setting rates . Smokers usually will pay more than non-smokers . The reason for the word usually , as opposed to definitely , is that in Canada some companies approach smoking differently . In other words , they charge smokers different rates based on what and how much they smoke . For example , cigar smokers are generally permitted to smoke 1 cigar a month with many companies to still be considered `` non-smokers '' for insurance purposes . I suspect it is for purely competitive reasons for cigar-smoking golfers . However , a more realistic approach is allowing 50 cigars a year which some companies take . I suggest that you look at the online quoting services to get an idea and then work with a local independent agent / broker to get the right policy at the right price . It is very important that you are truthful when declaring your smoking status as the company can deny your claim if you are not . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Smoking generally increase rates for a healthy person to about three times of what they would be for nonsmoker of similar health . If a smoker quits smoking and then applies for life insurance , the rate usually starts out as standard nonsmoker after one year of quitting . Then the rates gradually getting better with each year , until an average of 5 years out , when the rates are the same as they would have been if the person never smoked .
Yes , a part of the testing is for nicotine in the system . Some carriers allow for different uses of nicotine products and do not cost as much for coverage as someone who smokes , but still cost more than non smoker rates . This topic is a hotbutton in insurance as the pricing for smoking is significantly greater than nonsmoker rates , the cost differences encourages some people to attempt to deceive on the application . Some states specifically `` waive '' the two year contestability clause in cases where mistatements about smoking are involved . In my state , they do n't even allow the insurance carrier to pay out the benefit at the smoker rate , just return the premiums . One good thing is if you do smoke and want to quit , you can depending on the company , get a nonsmoker rate after anywhere from 1 year to 3 years after quiting . If you decide to quit smoking , inform your doctor so there is a record on file of this decision and good luck .
In addition to the good information given by the others on this page about smoking AFTER a policy is put into effect , I will address smoking while applying for life insurance . If you put on your application that you do not use tobacco , but then evidence of smoking is found in your labs or medical records , the application will usually not be voided . The insurance company will charge smoker rates , and if you have a health condition that is harmed by smoking , the application could be declined . Also , lying on an application about smoking then makes everything on the application suspect . This can also cause an increase in life insurance rates .
Great question . It all depends on the stituation . If you buy a life policy and did not smoke and started to smoke after you purchase the policy . It would be okay . If you lied on the application and you died from smoking issues the insurance company will look at the claim and investigage it more .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
The term life insurance brokerage market is fiercely competitive and offers a range of guaranteed premium periods like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . The non-rated health classifications are based on two categories : non-smoking and smoking . The non-smoking category is segmented into five sub categories : super preferred , preferred plus , preferred , standard plus and standard . The smoking category is segmented into three sub categories : preferred smoking , smoking and no-cigarette tobacco . Then theres the impaired risk categories classify mortality charges of insureds below the standard ratings , up to 16 tables . Your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition are all mitigating factors in premium pricing term life insurance . A nonsmoking super preferred male or female , age 25 purchasing 10 year guaranteed level term life insurance for $ 100,000 of coverage will pay around $ 80-85 a year .
Yes , it is possible to get insurance after breast cancer . There are a number of factors an insurance company would consider including : date of diagnosis , type and stage of cancer , size of tumor , type of treatment and date completed , recurrence or spread , reduced risks example smoking , any serious complications from treatment . Typically underwriting can only be done once treatment is completed . Higher grade tumors typically 10 years after last treatment considered with a rating . Best case lower grade tumor standard after 3 years . Typical case 2 years after completion of treatment rated policy . -LRB- extra premiums for increased risk -RRB- . I recommend , especially when you suspect you might be rated for insurance , that you work with an experienced independent insurance broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Through a urine specimen . They are pretty reliable . Interestingly , I once had a client who admitted to smoking on the application , but tested negative for nicotine on the urine sample . He was approved at non-smoker rates ! People often ask if secondhand smoke shows up . The answer is yes , it can . If you inhabit a very smoky environment day in and day out , and your body has pretty much reached its saturation point for nicotine , it very well could show up on your test . This is important to know . Sometimes people ask , what if I dont admit to smoking on the application , and wait a while after my last cigarette so that I test negative ? Well , if the application asks you if you have smoked in the last 12 months and you say no , that is insurance fraud . If they audit your claim and find out you lied , they can deny the benefit even if you died for a reason unrelated to cigarettes . A word to the wise should be sufficient .
Nothing will happen if you start smoking after getting a life insurance policy . As long as you were forthcoming about smoking on your life insurance application , your policy will stay intact . If you ever allow the policy to lapse , you will need to get a new policy at smoker rates ; it would not be reinstated at nonsmoker rates . But if you convert it to permanent someday , that will also be at nonsmoker rates .
Will life insurance know if I smoke ? Well , depending on how much coverage you purchase , if anyone else knows you smoke chances are they will too . First off , most insurance companies ask for an attending physicians statement and chart notes . So if you 've told your doctor , you smoke . Second , many plans require labs so if you smoke it will show up in your labs . And finally , some states have enacted laws that skip the two year contestability clause on life insurance when the applicant lies about smoking . These states view this as no contract was formed and wo n't let the carrier pay a reduced benefit . Just a return of premium .
Starting in 2014 , insurance companies can charge you up to 50 % more for premiums than someone who does n't use tobacco . However it is not a given that because the federal government allows this rate band that it will effect you.For Instancehere in New Jersey health insurers will not be allowed to vary health insurance premiums based on smoking status . Bottom line is that premiums can not vary by morethan50 % because of smoking status and that the final decision on whether smoking status will effect premiums is left to be decided on the state level .
Health insurance absolutely can charge more for smokers . In fact , under Healthcare Reform , the ONLY things for which carriers can charge more are age , location and smoking . Smoking was going to be a 50 % increase . That 's HUGE rate increase , but it ought to give you an idea of the claims that occur as a result of smoking . However , just recently Health & Human services stated they ca n't figure out how to logistically charge more for smoking at this time , so for the 1st year of Healthcare Reform , they are NOT going to charge more for smoking , which could end up raising the rates for everyone else . So again , prior to Healthcare Reform you will pay an increase . But as of 1/1/14 , no rate increase - at least for the 1st year .
That is an interesting question ! If you were asking about something simple , like spelling errors or unchecked boxes , in most cases , probably not . But when it comes to matters of incorrectly completing them with the intent to defraud or mislead -LRB- on either your , or the agent 's part -RRB- then yes , not only will it lead to the policy being voided , but often to civil and criminal charges . Insurance fraud is a bad deal . Now , since you explained that the policy was correctly filled out at its ' time of issuance , this becomes more a question of your integrity . You 've started doing something that would have changed the terms of the policy , so do you stop doing that , or have your policy amended to reflect your decision to smoke ? The risk to yourself , and now the insurance company has just increased dramatically . What you do to yourself is one thing , but to make someone else bear that risk unknowingly is another . Do you think they will be quick to pay if they learn that you pass from a smoking related disease developed over time , and that your policy said `` non-smoking '' ? You have a decision to make , and I hope that it is the right one . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Disability Insurance A Medical Expense ?
No , Disability Insurance is not a medical expense , and is not deductible as such on income tax forms . While an agent must have a license in health insurance to sell disability insurance , the insurance is not considered a medical expense such as health insurance and long term care insurance .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
Does Disability Insurance cover medical expenses ? It can , but not in the way health insurance would cover medical expenses . Disability insurance simply creates a pool of money for the insured to use for what they need to pay for . If medical expenses are part of their bills to be paid , then yes , disability insurance can help .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Health insurance is important because it is the way we finance health care . Health care is expensive with office visits , lab tests , x-rays , and surgery whether inpatient or outpatient . Most people do not have money saved up for medical expenses and therefore purchase health insurance to help pay for medical care . 80 % of Americans spend less than $ 900 annually on medical care and if you are young and healthy you may not think you need health insurance . Health insurance also protects us against large and unexpected medical expenses . The large health care expenses young adults have are usually caused by outdoor activities and sports where injuries can create high medical bills . Those are the main reasons why young adults should purchase health insurance to protect against larger unexpected medical bills .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Disability insurance is not deductible as a medical expense . However , it can be deducted as a business expense for those who are self employed and own their own Disability Insurance policies . Keep in mind that if you declare your Disability Insurance premiums as a tax deduction , the disability benefit that would normally go to you tax free in the event of you becoming disabled , would then likely be taxable .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Out of pocket is the amount you have to pay out of pocket for covered medical expenses . For example if your policy has a $ 10,000 out of pocket max , then the most you would pay for covered medical expenses would be $ 10,000 plus your deductible for that year regardless of how much your actual medical expenses were . The key here is covered medical expenses . If a procedure is not covered the out of pocket for that procedure would not be included in the total out of pocket in your policy . Deductibles and copay 's also typically do not count , so if you go to a doctor and have a $ 20 copay , that $ 20 is not counted in the out of pocket max .
Either you are referring to the best disability insurance company or the best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance . There are several excellent disability companies in the disability market place . One of the best is The Standard . The best defensive planning techniques using disability insurance is to determine if you can expense the premium as a business deduction and apply for 80 % of your compensation . While it is true that any benefits received will be subject to ordinary income tax , a deduction today is worth the risk of taxable event in the future . Nondeductible disability protects up to 60 % of your compensation with tax free distribution of benefits . If youre in a high tax bracket , the spread in benefits -LRB- 80 % versus 60 % -RRB- and the savings in the annual deduction are incentives to expense the premium if you have a legitimate business . Keep in mind that you can also buy disability insurance to cover your qualified plan contributions as well .
While I might agree with these answers , medical payments coverage is often purchased with the intent to cover medical expenses incurred in an accident involving an automobile not covered by a person 's health insurance coverage -LRB- deductibles , co-payments , dental expenses , cosmetic surgery , etc -RRB- . However many health insurers -LRB- including Medicare -RRB- have amended the co-ordination of benefits feature in their medical insurance plans to require an injured subscriber to exhaust their medical payments coverage before they can make a claim under their health insurance coverage . In effect , anyone buying -LRB- and paying for -RRB- medical payments coverage may not be able to collect on it should they ever need it ! Their health insurer may have already exhausted the limit . Before considering this coverage , an insured should check with their health insurer and make sure they can use the benefit to cover expenses not covered by their basic health insurance plan first . Once they have been fully reimbursed , only then can the health insurer become entitled to these benefits .
No , Disability Insurance is not a medical expense , and is not deductible as such on income tax forms . While an agent must have a license in health insurance to sell disability insurance , the insurance is not considered a medical expense such as health insurance and long term care insurance .
State Farm lists three types of Disability Insurance on their website : Disability Income Insurance , Mortgage Disability Income Insurance , and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance . The Disability Income Insurance provides payments to the insured during a period of disability so that they can pay for an incurred expenses . State Farm also sells Group Long Term Disability Insurance .
It depends upon the type and purpose of the disability insurance policy . Insurance premiums for a disability insurance policy taken out to pay for lost earnings due to a illness or injury are not a deductible business expense . However , a disability insurance policy taken out to pay business overhead expenses in the event the business owner is disabled by illness or injury is a deductible business expense . You can refer to IRS Publication 535 , released in 2014 , for the specific details on these matters .
Disability insurance you purchase without the financial contribution of your employer towards the premium expense of individual disability insurance will generally be free of income taxation . This tax treatment results from the circumstances . First , the money used to pay premiums are `` after-tax '' dollars . In other words , you already paid tax on the money used to pay the disability premiums when it was earned as income . Second , neither an employer or business will take a deduction on their tax returns for the payments made to provide the insurance to you . These two things make the income earned under a personal , individual disability policy free of income tax on the benefits . As a general rule , if a business pays for the a portion of the premium the benefit is probably taxable to some extent even when you contribute . The amount of the benefit that is taxable will be determined by the ratio of the total premium paid , compared against the premium amounts paid by the business and the individual . If the benefit is payable to a business the income is probably taxable . Corporate -LRB- or business -RRB- owned disability insurance can be designed to provide income or overhead expense protection . Overhead expense protection permits the deduction of cost on tax forms but the income is taxable . There is also the possibility that disability income coverage is used in a buy-sell agreement . When the benefit is paid to a business , as a general rule , the benefit is taxable . As in most instances , this general answer can not begin to address the variety of complicating circumstances so specific answers are best for specific situations .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
To answer your question requires us to consider the requirements under law for the family medical leave act . The FMLA imposes upon employers certain obligations to provide the employee unpaid leave from their job without fear of losing their job . Employees continue to enjoy employer provided medical benefits as if they are active at work . Maternity leave is an eligible medical event . Employees are entitled to up to twelve work weeks of leave in a 52 week year . Seek out more information by searching the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 for more information . Now , as to obtaining an `` extended , paid maternity leave from your job '' , you seem to be asking on whether there is a way to buy an extended period of benefit for a group , employer sponsored medical or disability income program . I have not encountered this option as a benefit in 38 years of work in this industry but , the best option is to contact the benefits administrator or Human Resources at your employer with this question . No optional benefit available will waive the rights or duties of the employer under common policy and practice , nor under the FLMA of 1993 . There are indemnification type health insurance policies that may provide some cash benefit , and you can buy disability insurance prior to the pregancy that can cover medical as a disability , but they wo n't impact the employer benefits nor their right to expect you to return to work when their maternity leave expires . The indemnity policies and disability insurance will have specific underwriting requirements and being currently pregnant is likely to be a condition that prohibits a benefit until the pregnancy runs its course .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get Cheap Health Insurance ?
If you want the least exposure at the lowest premium then I recommend looking at an HSA qualified plan . The deductible is higher but if you are healthy you will save more on premium than the one or two doctor visits per year . An HSA qualified health plan will provide the most protection if you do have to go to the hospital or your health turns bad , at the lowest premium . A good independent agent dealing with health insurance can help you find a plan that fits your budget .
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
That is a great question ! There is a reason why things are cheap . You buy a cheap car , you spend a lot on repairs . You buy cheap clothes , they rip or shrink . Term insurance is cheap because it has very few perks , like a whole life policy would . Your term policy will have no cash value , and will end at a specific time . Because there is no management of your cash involved , and the odds are great that the company will collect from you for years and not have to pay you anything , those policies can be sold very cheaply . About the only way that you can stack the odds back in your favor and get money out of your policy would be to get a `` return of premium '' policy or rider . For a larger premium payment , this allows you to receive back most of what you had paid into the policy . If you have questions , feel free to drop me a line , okay ? Thanks for asking !
By cheap I assume that you are referring to the premium . The cheap I like to think of is the cost when you have the claim and your company stands behind you and pays everything that you expected . Regardless of the premium , you will then know what cheap really means . A major property loss could take 100 years of premiums to pay for . Having correct coverage is the way to have the truly cheap homeowners policy , find an agent , one you can trust .
Good question but think about it we need to ask ourselves a few questions before we go cheap sometimes cheap is good we all need to be good stewards of our money so the questions we should ask if answered honestly will be an indicator . Do I eat good healthy food ? Do I drink alcohol ? Do I work out at least 20 minutes 2 times a week ? How is my spiritual life ? Then we can decide which policy fits my need it can be fairly cheap but you must answer the questions and have a good consultant that cares about you not the money the money will come when we serve the people .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
What do you mean by government health insurance ? If you are asking about a government health insurance plan such as Medicaid then I guess you could say it 's cheap as that is a program for the poor for which they do n't really pay anything . If you are asking about health insurance for Federal government employees they have many health insurance plan options at different price points to choose from . I do n't think many government employees think their health insurance is cheap even though their coverage is largely paid for by the government . Certainly in comparison to most of their peers in private sector companies these days most government employees pay less for their health insurance coverage .
Life insurance is priced the same for everyone . You can not get a discount on life insurance , and the discount store mentality does not work well with life insurance . You need to work with a knowledgeable agent to get your cheapest price . Getting a low quote from someone who knows little about life insurance does not mean you will get that price . I feel that the best way to buy cheap life insurance is to use an agency who can take your health information and match you up with the company that has your best rates . Some , like mine , can be found online . But wherever you go , the place to buy cheap life insurance is where the agent is valuable .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
Term life insurance is cheap because it only pays out if death occurs during that period of time . The lower the age , the lower the actuarial risk of passing away , the lower the price . To get a policy that will be assured to be there to the end of life , the premium may be reasonable , but not necessarily `` cheap '' . Knowing it will be there for your loved ones at the time of need can definitely make it worth the cost . That is not to say there is not a need for cheap term life insurance . Thankfully , both Term and Permanent policies are available so that coverage is available and affordable for nearly anyone who wants it .
As Peggy noted , it 's really cheap to buy life insurance on a newborn baby . The primary underwriting factor is the responses to yes or no health questions - there are no exam requirements for them because of their age -LRB- they 're babies ! -RRB- . Many parents look at buying a whole life policy because it 's very cheap and can be kept for life . A great rider to look at adding to a WL policy on a child is a guaranteed insurability option rider -LRB- GIO -RRB- - in short , this rider says that you can increase the face amount at certain intervals with no additional medical underwriting . Another option many parents consider is adding a child rider onto their own policy - this is a very cheap and easy way to add term coverage for your children . Let me know if I can be of further help . Thanks !
Remember cheap does n't mean better . What you want to find is a reputable company AND cheap rates . Compare your coverages as well as the rates - this is what I tell my clients . Another thing to look at is who is selling you the cheap rates - do you have a 1-800 telemarketer to talk to or a Licensed Agent who knows exactly what 's covered in your state ?
Your going to have to contact your local independent agent to get some quotes for you . It is not going to be cheap , but if you maintain a good record when you turn 25 your premiums will change . If you decide to become insured under your parents policy have them inquire their independent insurance agent about an umbrella policy , or personal excess liabilty . They will be shocked at how cheap a $ 1 million dollar policy costs , which will help protect their home , retirement , etc. . Best of luck !
Lets use the analogy of living in a home . You basically have two choices : to buy , or to rent . Suppose you rent . Why would you do that ? First of all , you dont have to put any money up . Nor do you have to pay any real estate taxes . Nor do you have to pay for any maintenance . Its basically a cheap way to put a roof over your head . But , you always have the option to buy . Suppose now you buy . Why would you do that ? Equity . You have something to show for your money . Your home attains a monetary value that can be exploited . Of course , it costs more . But you get more . And you still get a roof over your head . This model is useful for understanding life insurance . Term insurance is like renting a home . Its a pretty cheap way to get the coverage you need . No equity , no added value . But you can convert it to a permanent policy . Whole life equates to buying a home . You pay more , but you get more . There is cash available for you to use , in addition to the survivor benefit for your heirs - that roof over your head . Make sense ?
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
There are many carriers out there all can be quite `` Cheap '' But be careful when shopping for rates cheap does n't always mean you have the proper coverage . Also depends on what type of coverage you are looking for . When shopping online there are times that the rate is fantastic then you find out that they are not even allowed to sell insurance in your state . you also have to think about in the event of a claim can they be reached and you talk to someone local ? Buyer beware make you are covered properly like the old saying goes if it is to good to be true then most likely that is the case . However I do have some carries that I have a client in that has full coverage on a car and only $ 143 for 6 months of coverage with low deductible now that is cheap but her coverage is not . So the key is making sure you know what you are purchasing before you put the money out . A Local agent or the States insurance commissioners office can assist you in finding what you are looking for
There are many cheap auto insurance companies throughout the US . -LRB- That is ... carriers that charge low rates -RRB- How cheap will your rate be ? It depends where you live and other underwriting factors that could impact the price . For example , while Progressive , Esurance , Geico and Erie may offer low rates in Ohio , in Pennsylvania or New Jersey , a completely different set of companies may be the best option . As experienced brokers , along with our top-rated websites , we search , find and compare the absolute lowest car insurance rates in all ares . That 's our job and a big reason why customers prefer to work with brokers .
Cheap life insurance is relative to the insured person 's age , gender , build , health , and tobacco status . The premium also depends on the type of policy and amount of coverage . So it is impossible to put a dollar value on `` cheap life insurance '' . You can run some quotes online to see what prices you might get . Then give the website a call to make sure that you qualify for the quotes you are looking at . Sometimes we even find lower priced policies for our clients when they call in .
Good insurance is n't cheap and cheap insurance is n't good . The higher the limits and the more coverage you purchase , the more you will pay . Does someone living in an apartment with few assets and an older vehicle need a 5 million dollar umbrella over a 500 thousand dollar auto liability policy ? Not unless he/she is a brain surgeon who lives an extremely frugal life . But think about it , if the apartment dweller mentioned liquidates everything he/she has into a pile of cash , how much would be in that pile ? Let 's say $ 100,000 A lawsuit can not get blood out of a stone , but the award from a lawsuit one loses can result in one or moreliens on current and future income and assets -LRB- within limits -RRB- . The lower the liability limits one purchases and the more restricted the coverage , the lower the premium . Never buy insurance by price until you are comparing two identicalcoverage packages - and then be very waryabout the exclusions or differences in the fine print -LRB- forms and endorsements -RRB- between the policies . Definitely secure the services of a competent agent or broker that knows their insurance . The ten or fifteen percent commission you pay them will be worth a hundred times that when you purchase the correct policy based on your exposures .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does A Single Man Need Life Insurance ?
It depends on several factors such as your age , goals and objectives . Many people who are single now expect to have a family sometime in the future . Or , they have extended family members in their care . One 's insurability can change in the future so starting now while younger and insurable is sensible .
Whether a person NEEDS life insurance or not , -LRB- single , married . male , female - whatever -RRB- , really depends on what that person 's financial condition is . Whether a person WANTS , -LRB- or should want -RRB- , life insurance is related , but has many other determining factors . As has been mentioned above - if a person has family or charities they want to leave a legacy to ; If a person has financial obligations that would fall on family members if they should become disabled or die , these are good REASONS to purchase life insurance . If a person has enough wealth in liquid assets to cover any eventuality and protect loved ones from liability , then , no - there is no NEED . But even in such a case a wise person would WANT to have a Whole Life policy with a Mutual company that pays dividends to the policy holders .
Do you need life insurance ? No ! If you never plan on getting married or starting a family you do n't need life insurance . However let 's think outside of the box . What do you care about ? Think about the impact you can have by buying a policy and having it benefit a charity or research , perhaps a scholarship . Something to think about .
A single person may have immediate or related family members , business partners or favorite charities that he or she wants to protect and/or transfer assets to when he or she dies . Life insurance can also be a tax advantaged supplemental retirement plan that designed correctly may generate tax free distributions in the future .
That is a great question ! I guess the answer really depends upon you , and your view of your future . I 'm assuming that though you are n't married , that you still have family that is alive , and that may be burdened with the expense of your funeral arrangements ? If so , you might think about a policy to spare them those expenses , they will be burdened enough with their grief . Are you planning one day to marry ? If so , then you 've already taken steps to provide for your future wife and children . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
Anyone can help make their passing less stressful on survivors by having life insurance , at least enough to pay off the funeral and pay off debt . If you have a business , there are a number of ways life insurance can be used to transfer your business interests to prospective buyers . Whether the death benefit goes to a funeral home , charity , relatives , or business partners , life insurance is a smooth and tax friendly way of handling end of life issues .
A single man may need life insurance to pay off bills , a mortgage or loans . Having life insurance to cover funeral expenses is especially helpful for a single man , as there will not be a spouse who is there to take care of that obligation . A single man may also want to leave money to relatives or charity , which is easy to do with life insurance .
A single man may need life insurance to pay off bills , a mortgage or loans . Having life insurance to cover funeral expenses is especially helpful for a single man , as there will not be a spouse who is there to take care of that obligation . A single man may also want to leave money to relatives or charity , which is easy to do with life insurance .
The best way to buy anything -LRB- including Insurance -RRB- is to know what you want before you start looking . You should sit down and discuss your insurance needs with a professional so that you can identify exactly what you need . A young man who is single in his 20 's has a different insurance need than a young man of 35 with a stay at home wife and 2 small children . What you dont want is to be sold a policy that doesnt address what your needs and wants are -LRB- do you want a lot of coverae for the least amount of money or do you want to build cash value in your policy -RRB- . Take the time upfront to identify your needs and then you can choose the best plan for your family based on amount , price and coverages .
Auto insurance rates are based on several factors . The clients driving history and experience , location and type of vehicle . Now there are other things taken into consideration which would be multi-packaging polices with the same company , multi-car , education and so on . An insurance company will take all this information and make a calculated rate based on all this criteria to determine a premium . So for example if you are a single male 25 years old who has been driving since 16 with no tickets or accidents and a college graduate driving a 2013 BMW the insurance company will take this information and come up with a rate . Now lets say the single male wants collision and comprehensive coverage and at least 100/300/100 liability limits on his policy for his $ 40,000 vehicle . The insurance company says if you pay us $ 600.00 for six months -LRB- just a number I made up -RRB- we will insure your car is covered up to the actual cash value and we will pay for any property damage you cause and bodily injury up to the limits you purchased . In a worst case scenario the single man can cause an accident -LRB- assuming he is liable -RRB- that could pay out as much as $ 440,000 . I would say this is a pretty inexpensive way to protect yourself .
It depends , is there someone who will have to take care of your stuff and clean up your situation if you pass ? In other words , you may be single , but is there somebody who loves you enough to be that person who handles your service , settles your stuff and maybe empties your apartment or home . Usually it 's your mom . The question only you can answer is how much more difficult do you want to make it for your mom ? Is n't losing a child -LRB- no matter what age -RRB- for a mom , hard enough ? Would you want to add to the pain by having her come up with the money to take care of what you leave behind ? Do you want her to forgo wages because of your situation ? For me , as a young man long before insurance as a career came into place , the idea of being single and owning life insurance made sense . I simply did n't want to crush my mom under the burdens of losing me , paying for my service , dealing with my stuff . I know usually somebody will whip out some `` math '' to get you not do what I suggest and that 's fine . Sometimes the `` Math '' simply does n't matter . Your choice .
Once upon a time there was a very rich man . He owned a number of businesses which he had started himself and which he had built himself . Altogether , he employed close to 20,000 people . That means he created opportunities for 20,000 people to support their families and lead their own lives . He understood that he could never have built his business empire without the dedication , hard work , and loyalty of each and every one of those men and women . He took good care of them . He paid them well . Lots of bonuses , lots of benefits . He was very community-minded . He knew that no man , and no family , was an island unto itself . We need each other . We need each other in times of natural disasters , and human tragedy , and family distress . When people lose their job , or get sick , or maybe lose their home , they need a helping hand . He always made sure his hand was ready to give . He took it upon himself to help many , many people . He gave generously to community service organizations . He made sure that families who were suffering had the means to weather the storm and remain together . When people in need came to him , he helped them get back on to their own two feet . He was an extremely dedicated family man . He loved his wife dearly . He was always there for his children . Everything he did was really for them . He wanted them to have the best of everything . He especially wanted his son and daughter to have a great jump-start in life . His entire estate the houses , the businesses , the valuables - was going to go to them when he passed away . One day he had a lunch meeting with his friend who was an estate planning attorney . His friend made the following observation : You know , you are quite a person . You have done such a tremendous job building a life for yourself . All the people you employ , all the people you help . How fortunate your family is to have you as a provider . But heres the problem : God forbid you die tomorrow , this entire wonderful world you have built collapses . Without you and your broad shoulders , the entire enterprise stops in its tracks . You can imagine that our friend the Rich Man didnt like hearing that at all . He had indeed put so much of himself into what he held to be precious . It would almost be an act of betrayal for them to lose it all when he died . I mean , shouldnt he make provisions for their care after his death ? Why shouldnt the show go on ? So many people have become dependent on him . So , he bought a bunch of life insurance . Life insurance to make sure his family wouldnt have to sell half his assets just to pay the governments estate tax bill . They wouldnt have to sell the residences or family jewels . The heirlooms could stay in the family . He bought life insurance to enable his businesses to keep running . People would be able to keep their jobs . Vendors would get paid . Clients would receive service . The management team would have enough money to keep going and growing . He bought life insurance to fill the coffers of charities doing noble work in his community . Hungry people could get fed . Homeless people could get shelter . Unemployed people get retrained for new jobs . Life insurance made it possible for the great work this man had been doing to continue . And because life insurance is such a great deal financially , the cost of this planning was literally pennies on the dollar . Each dollar of life insurance benefit literally cost him a few cents . Of course , it was this financial wisdom and eagerness to take advantage of a great deal that made him rich in the first place :-RRB- Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
No , not really . If you are talking about the individual health insurance market then your freedom of movement has been severely restricted by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . So , outside of the annual open enrollment period each year you can only change your health insurance coverage if you experience a change of life status event or special election period as defined under ObamaCare . Some examples are getting married or divorced , having a child or moving to another state or outside your current carrier 's service area in your state . Similar restrictions apply if you are covered under a group health plan that offers multiple options or one of the new private health insurance exchanges that some companies are moving to . An increasingly common situation that many consumers are being or will be faced with is finding out that their favorite physician is no longer participating in the provider network of the health insurance plan they enrolled in . Cancelling your coverage to switch to a new insurance carrier in mid-year that does have your doctor as an in-network provider wo n't meet the criteria for a change of life status event or a special election period . You could cancel your old coverage but you would have to wait until the next open enrollment period and the first of the year to get new individual health insurance . Failure to pay your monthly insurance premium is also not a qualifying event and can leave you out in the cold until the next enrollment period so do n't think about that as a strategy to change insurance carriers in mid-stream . While this was tied into a continuation of coverage under COBRA issue , I recently witnessed a heartbreaking example of this situation . I received a frantic call from the girlfriend of a man who has terminal cancer . At first she was unsure as to his last day of being covered under his employer 's plan and whether he had continued his coverage under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . In fact , the initial information she gave me was that he had not continued his group coverage and was still within the 60-day window that a person has to purchase individual coverage after losing their employer based coverage . If this had been the case , even though the man was being treated for terminal cancer I would have been able to enroll him in major medical coverage that would have had to cover his care immediately . After digging into this man 's situation more deeply we discovered that he had elected to continue his coverage under his former employer 's plan , had paid the first month 's premium by check but had then failed to make his second month 's premium payment and had his COBRA coverage cancelled due to non-payment . The fact that this man was undergoing intensive chemo & radiation therapy and being given massive doses of pain medications made it understandable as to how he missed making that second premium payment but that did n't stop the COBRA plan administrator from terminating him for non-payment . Unfortunately , as cancellation of coverage for non-payment of premium is not a qualifying event the individual major medical carriers were within their rights to decline him for coverage until the next open enrollment period and coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . This has left the man uninsured at the worst possible time and has his friends and family raising money for his care . If he is still alive by the first of the year I 'll be able to get him coverage but his life expectancy is not that great but the bills he is accumulating are .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
Key Man DI -LRB- also known as Key Person DI -RRB- is a coverage that would pay benefits to a business to cover the financial loss if a vital employee became disabled due to an illness or injury . Any business that would find it hard to replace an employee , or any business that wouldnt be able to function without a specific employee , needs Key Man DI . And if a company had more than one key person whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then DI can be purchased for more than one Key Man . ''
Is Life Insurance really worth it ? That depends entirely on the individual involved . For some the idea of protecting their family if they do n't make it home some night is worth a great deal . For others not so much , as it depends on your relationships in life . Even as single young man , I bought life insurance . Why ? cause it was `` worth '' it to me to make sure that my mom could deal with the clean up of the mess I left behind without having to spend the money she worked hard for herself . It was `` worth '' it to me to make a terrible situation that my mom might have to face not a financial hardship at the same time . Later on , it was `` worth '' it to me to have coverage for my wife and kids . This is really a personal answer for each person . I ca n't tell anybody why it 's worth it to them , that has to be their own choice .
At least enough to cover the cost of taking care of your situation if it happens along with enough to prevent this tragedy from becoming a double whammy for the people who love you and will be the ones cleaning up your business behind you . As a young single man I carried around 50k of life insurance at 19 . Why ? I did n't want my parents who were the people who would have to take care of my stuff I left behind to suffer any financial hardship to do so . Imagine your mom , already dealing with the loss of you , having to also deal with the cost of a service for you , loss of wages from work and other costs . Long before I became an insurance agent I loved my mom enough to not want to make my death even worse for her than it could be . You can apply that thought towards anybody that loves you and will be that person or persons having to deal with your loss . Hopefully , you matter to somebody . That 's what you 're doing it for . At a minimum carry enough to account for your responsibilities and to cover the loss other people will have to take on to deal with your loss . Your loss is hard enough to the people that love you . Do n't make it worse .
I do n't think you can state whole life is actually better than term life insurance or term life insurance is better than whole life . It just depends on the need by you , the client . There are many different product options when it comes to life insurance . There is the right product for practically every situation . The true use of whole life is when there is a level premium need for life insurance your `` whole life '' hence the name . However , whole life insurance has become the Swiss Army knife of life insurance . The riders and cash value can be used for critical illness , terminal illness , children 's college funds to retirement benefits . There are now lots of uses for whole life insurance . Term life insurance is meant more to cover a need for a fixed amount of time . There are term limits that vary from annually to 5 years , 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , 25 years , 30 years and even 35 years . You may also set a premium on a universal life plan that does n't build cash value other than to level your premiums as far as age 151 years old . The main thing to consider which type of life insurance you need is to first identify your need for life insurance . A wise man once shared , you should buy life insurance like you will die tomorrow and invest like you will live forever . Find an experienced independent broker to help you identify your needs and shop the market for the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
Yes you will buy insurance online technology is moving fast you will need to do your research there are many different policies to meet different needs so what are your -LRB- Goals -RRB- will you need money in 5 years or 30 years ? The answer is yes for everyone we must learn how to open the windows when the windows are positioned to open or the curse that Adam and Eve set into motion will be on our nation and the nation will be cursed . This gets a little away from the question you asked but this is the only way man has always wanted the power but only God has it and no man can give it . Choice , Choice , Choice
Life insurance is cheaper for women if comparing the same rating class of each sex . The older the person is , and the longer the guaranteed coverage period lasts , the bigger the price discrepancy . That is because men die at a younger age than women , on average . If the woman has a health condition , or is overweight or underweight , smokes , or has some other risk factor to bump her into a higher rate class than a man of the same age , her rate can be higher than his . Just being a woman does not automatically mean she will pay a cheaper price than a man .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Pay For A Breast Reduction ?
If you look on page 56 of your Medicare and You book there is a list of things that Medicare will not cover like Long-term care or custodial care , routine dental or eye care , dentures , acupuncture , hearing aids and exams for fitting them and yes cosmetic surgery is also not covered . With that being said if your doctor find thats it is medically necessary to perform the reduction to elevate pressure from the spinal column that is causing you sever back pain , then it may be covered but you need to check with your doctor and get his professional opinion .
Medicare will cover a breast reduction , but you 'll need to meet the guidelines . Unlike private insurance where you get pre-authorized , you 'll need to meet these specific guidelines : Individual weight of the breasts Amount to be removed A big problem you 'll run into is that breast reductions are performed by plastic surgeons and many do not accept medicare coverage . Begin this conversation with your surgeon from day 1 to assure you 're using the correct physician .
Most health insurance will only pay for breast reductions if it is medically necessary . Medically necessary is a subjective term . For example if you want breast reduction surgery for cosmetic reasons it would not be covered . If on the other hand if you were 5 ' 2 '' and needed reduction surgery to ease back issues posture and pain it may be medically necessary . You should check with you doctor , read your Evidence of Coverage and check with the insurance company .
Medicare will pay for breast reduction to relieve the pain caused by the conditions of macromastia or breast hypertrophy . A reduction mammoplasty will be OK 'd by Medicare if medically necessary as shown by non-surgical methods failing to alleviate symptoms , and the condition being present for at least 6 months .
It is highly unlikely that a breast lift would be covered as such a procedure is generally considered cosmetic in nature . For such a procedure to be approved medical necessity would have to be demonstrated . There are some circumstances where back/neck/shoulder problems can be traced to very enlarged breasts and a case for medical necessity for breast reduction surgery has successfully been made . But , if you are just losing the battle with time and gravity you should not expect a breast lift to be covered by your health insurance .
When breast reconstruction is merely for cosmetic reasons the procedure is not considered medically necessary and would not be covered . Breast reconstruction surgery is normally covered by Medicare following cancer treatment that includes a radical mastectomy . In some cases Medicare may cover breast reduction and reconstruction when the surgery is done out of medical necessity .
Breast augmentation is generally considered a cosmetic procdure and not a medically necessary procedure , therefore , it is usually not covered . Breast reduction can be considered medically necessary and covered by health insurance if the breasts are causing back and neck issues . If it is considered medically necessary the surgery is covered once a woman is 18 years old and an adult .
Medicare does not cover cosmetic surgery but will call procedures that are Medically necessary . If your doctor certifies that you have health problems , such as back strain , caused by breast size and reduction surgery would provide relief , Medicare may cover breast reduction surgery . Ask your doctor about the Medicare guidelines .
Your health insurance may cover a breast reduction if it is not considered cosmetic . However , if it is deemed to be cosmetic , there is a very good chance you will have to pay for the procedure yourself . Since each policy is different , check with your insurer and verify that it is/is not covered .
Medicare will pay for breast reconstruction to repair the breast after injury , to improve the function of the breast , or to reconstruct one of both breasts after a mastectomy . Medicare will also cover the post surgery brassiere . This applies to elective -LRB- prophylactic -RRB- mastectomy for those with strong genetic markers to get breast cancer , as well as those who had the mastectomy as treatment for breast cancer .
Prior to January 1 , 2013 the most likely answer to your question would have been no . Though , in group health insurance there might have been contracts , especially for some self-insured groups , where coverage for a breast pump might have been covered . One of the earlier provisions of the Affordable Care Act does require coverage for lactation services of which a breast pump is certainly a part of and therefore is technically covered . The law however does not specify any particular types or models of breast pumps that must be covered so the consumer should be aware that availability of breast pumps and the types and models that are covered will vary from one insurance carrier to another depending upon their internal policies regarding such durable medical equipment items . I advise that you check with your insurance carrier regarding their specific benefits for this service as they will probably have preferred vendors that they will want their members to purchase or rent these devices from and they will be able to inform you as to specifically what types or models of devices your policy with them will cover . Going out and buying a breast pump and then just filing a claim with your insurance carrier might result in a denial of the claim or a reduced level of coverage if your purchase was not within their guidelines .
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
There is usually some type of life insurance policy you can get after being diagnosed with breast cancer . If you get a policy that covers you , either after disclosing that you have breast cancer , or because they did not ask -LRB- i.e. guaranteed issue life insurance -RRB- , yes , it will cover death from breast cancer or any other illness or accident . If you got a life insurance policy before having any idea that you were going to be diagnosed with breast cancer , the policy also will cover death due to breast cancer . We hope that the breast cancer never results in death . But if it did , you would be covered .
Critical Illness Insurance will usually cover breast cancer , but it may not cover masses in the breast that are in situ or stage 1 cancer -LRB- or may pay less for breast cancer in the lower stages -RRB- . Review your particular policy regarding their guidelines for breast cancer before purchasing your critical illness insurance policy .
Medicare does not generally cover plastic surgery for cosmetic reasons . Medicare will cover plastic surgery if it to restore a part of the body damaged due to injury , or to regain function of a malformed body part . It will also pay for breast prosthesis after mastectomy for breast cancer .
Breast implants are not covered by Medicare if done for cosmetic purposes . However , Medicare will cover breast prostheses following a mastectomy under Medicare Part A -LRB- if done on an inpatient basis -RRB- or Medicare Part B -LRB- if done on an outpatient basis -RRB- . The post-surgery brassiere is also covered by Medicare .
Critical Illness Insurance will usually cover breast cancer , but it may not cover masses in the breast that are in situ -LRB- DCIS -RRB- . Some critical illness policies pay for lower stage cancers with a reduced benefit . Review your particular policy regarding their guidelines for breast cancer before purchasing your critical illness insurance policy .
Under the new Affordable Care Act provisions , equipment for breast-feeding is often covered . But mechanical equipment coverage seems a bit murky . It may be best to contact your current insurer and describe the type of breast pump you have . They should be able to advise you if it is covered . Breast ... , I mean , best of luck to you .
If you have purchased the life insurance prior to being diagnosed with breast cancer , yes you are covered . If you have had breast cancer and looking to purchase life insurance there are some things you need to know . The type , amount and terms depends on the cancer itselfand how long you have been cancer free after your last treatment . To get into the standard ratings after breast cancer practically all carriers will want to see you cancer free for 10 years . Anything less than10 yearswill be a higher risk policy of either rated premiums or graduated benefits . Good luck .
Cosmetic breast implants are not a covered expense under Medicare . Breast reconstructive surgery following a mastectomy is a covered expense under Medicare Part A and subject to the 2013 deductible of $ 1184 . Follow up treatment after discharge would be covered under Medicare Part B . You will need to satisfy your Part B deductible of $ 147 for 2013 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Minor Be Beneficiary Of Life Insurance ?
Yes , as Peggy mentioned you can name a minor as a beneficiary , however , you would be better served by at the very least leaving it in trust for a minor . Setting up a formal trust expressing your wishes would be preferred . In Canada , since you can direct that the proceeds be paid in the form of an annuity this should be explored . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A minor can be the beneficiary of a life insurance policy ; however , the court will appoint a financial guardian to oversee the distribution of the death benefit to the child , unless that has been taken care of in another way . It is better to leave the proceeds to a trust , or to the person who would become the legal guardian of the child .
Minors can certainly be named as a beneficiary to an insurance policy . But what you want to consider is what the purpose of the insurance is . If you want the insurance to cover your final and burial expenses then you may not want to name a minor because he or she will not have access to the money until age 18 or 21 depending on where you live . If the purpose is to leave a legacy for the minor , the best thing to do is create a living trust . Name the trust as the beneficiary and earmark those funds for the minor . A living trust is very flexible . You can basically say when and for what reason the minor can have access to the funds . You can say that money can be paid for the minors private education ; you can say the minor gets 25 % at age 21 , etc. . And the best part is whatever you have specified ca n't be changed after your passing AND the trust does not go through probate . So , there is no court intervention or delays .
Minors can be beneficiaries on a life insurance policy . Most of the time minor children are contingent beneficiaries as a backup to their parents if both were to die . But just because you can do it doesnt mean you should it . When minors receive death benefit proceeds after both parents have died custodial control and/or guardianship can arise . The creation of a trust could be a better alternative . Consult with an attorney before placing minor children as beneficiaries on your policy .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
There are actually two common but different ways to assign life insurance . The first way to assign is with assigning the beneficiary for a temporary purpose . An example would be a financial institution loaning a substantial amount of money may require a person to assign them as beneficiary until the loan is repaid . Once this loan is repaid the assignment of beneficiary would go back to the original beneficiary , unless specifically changed again by the policy owner . The second common practice of assignment of life insurance is to assign a new owner of a policy . This is most common with cash value life insurance which a parent or grandparent purchased on a minor child . A minor can not own a policy with financial decisions , so an adult , usually parent or grandparent , will be owner until the child becomes an adult . The assign is made from the parent or previous owner to the insured child as the new owner .
Sure you can . All you need is a simple form . Ask your broker , orl call the carrier directly . Big question : what will you do if unfortunately this beneficiary is not alive when the benefit can be paid ? You need a contingent beneficiary as a backup . Give that some thought : who should be second in line to receive the money ? Another big question : is the beneficiary going to be a minor ? Did you know that an insurance company will not pay a benefit to a minor ? This means that you need to do some estate planning , in terms of having an executor and custodian appointed . An attorney who specializes in estate planning can help you .
A minor can be a life insurance beneficiary , but it is generally in the child 's best interest to make the beneficiary of your life insurance policy be a trust , or trusted relative or friend who will use the money for the welfare of the child . That is because minors can not legally handle the proceeds and the court could appoint a guardian to do so for them .
Yes , a life insurance beneficiary can be a minor . However , if naming a minor as beneficiary , the policy owner should consider naming a financial guardian for the child at the same time , as that will be required by the court if the insured person dies before the child reaches the age of adulthood . If a financial guardian is not designated to handle the life insurance proceeds for the child , the court will appoint one .
That is a great question ! It will depend upon the insurance companies rules . I have worked with some that will not allow a minor without guardianship or an established trust fund to be named as a beneficiary . Others are not so particular , but it may not be in your best interests to allow it . Often there are problems legally transferring funds to minors , and unless the guardian or trust is established , the money gets held up needlessly . Check with your State laws concerning minors , and then with your agent , and see if that can even be done . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Yes , a minor child can be named beneficiary of a life insurance policy and often are as a contingent beneficiary . It is a good idea to set up a trust to disperse funds to the minor child or name a guardian in your will to take care of the money on the child 's behalf .
Yes and they often are with young families . Many attorneys recommend declaring a financial steward or custodial trustee for the financial disbursements to minors . Sometimes a trust is the beneficiary on behalf of minor children . Interestingly , there is always a contingent beneficiary option in a life insurance application .
Yes a minor child can be a life insurance proceeds beneficiary . If you plan to make the minor child the primary beneficiary , you should take these steps as well . You should have a will in place to name a trust or legal guardian to hold and disperse the funds until the child turns 18 years old . Otherwise a probate judge will decide the child 's guardianship . That court appointed guardian will disperse the funds .
Yes , a minor can be a beneficiary of a life insurance policy . If a minor is named as beneficiary , be sure to appoint a financial guardian in your will to manage the money for your child until they reach the age of adulthood -LRB- either 18 or 21 , depending on where you live -RRB- . Otherwise , the court will appoint one for your child until they are of the age to manage their own money .
A qualified beneficiary must notify the plan administrator of a qualifying event within 60 days after divorce or legal separation or a child 's ceasing to be covered as a dependent under plan rules . Plan participants and beneficiaries generally must be sent an election notice not later than 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred . The individual then has 60 days to decide whether to elect COBRA continuation coverage . The person has 45 days after electing coverage to pay the initial premium . Qualified beneficiaries must be given an election period during which each qualified beneficiary may choose whether to elect COBRA coverage . Each qualified beneficiary may independently elect COBRA coverage . A covered employee or the covered employee 's spouse may elect COBRA coverage on behalf of all other qualified beneficiaries . A parent or legal guardian may elect on behalf of a minor child . Qualified beneficiaries must be given at least 60 days for the election . This period is measured from the later of the coverage loss date or the date the COBRA election notice is provided by the employer or plan administrator . The election notice must be provided in person or by first class mail within 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred .
Yes , a minor can be a beneficiary on life insurance . However , until they reach the age when they are legally considered old enough to manage their own money -LRB- which is either age 18 or age 20 , depending on the state in which you live -RRB- , someone else will need to be named to manage their money for them . 1 -RRB- This can be someone you specify in your will . Some people even name two guardians : one to take care of the money -LRB- guardian of the estate -RRB- and one to take care of the children -LRB- guardian of the person -RRB- . 2 -RRB- You can create a trust to be the beneficiary of the policy , with the trust spelling out how you want the money to be used on the minor 's behalf . 3 -RRB- If no guardian is specified or trust created , the court may have to appoint a guardian at the time after death when the policy proceeds are collected . You may want to visit with your lawyer and life insurance agent to be sure that you have your policy set up in the way that you want it to , if a tragedy should happen .
Yes , as Peggy mentioned you can name a minor as a beneficiary , however , you would be better served by at the very least leaving it in trust for a minor . Setting up a formal trust expressing your wishes would be preferred . In Canada , since you can direct that the proceeds be paid in the form of an annuity this should be explored . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
If a life insurance beneficiary is a minor , the court will appoint a guardian to handle the money for the child until they reach the age of 18 or 21 , depending on the state . If you want to select that person yourself , you can name a property guardian in your will , or name an adult custodian for the life insurance proceeds under the Uniform Transfers to Minor Act -LRB- UTMA -RRB- .
Yes , minors can be beneficiaries on life insurance . If the insured person passes away while the child is still a minor -LRB- under age 18 in some states , under age 21 in others -RRB- , the death benefit must be managed by an adult until the child reaches the age of adulthood . This helpful article describes some ways of legally handling this situation . WEBSITELINK
A life insurance trust is an irrevocable , non-amenable trust that is set up for the purpose of being owner and beneficiary of one or more life insurance policies . A life insurance trust generally exempts the life insurance policy from estate tax . The trust also can spell out how the Trustee should manage the death benefit so it best serves the needs of specified minors . Before deciding to set up a life insurance trust you should consult a reputable life insurance agent and lawyer . Some things to consider are that the Insured person can not be the Trustee , and only the Trustee can change the beneficiary . Also , the Insured person can not borrow from the life insurance policy .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Get Life Insurance After Being Denied ?
You can still get life insurance . Which plan will depend on the reason for denial . There are some plans that do not ask if you have ever been denied insurance . If you can answer the rest of the health questions with a no answer you can get the insurance . I have a couple plans that ask no health questions at all . Just because you are denied insurance by one company does not mean you can not get insurance through another .
You can always buy life insurance , the real question is what you will pay for it . Most life companies look at your age , sex , smoking status and health issues when deciding whether to insure you or not . They can often charge a `` rating '' -LRB- a premium surcharge -RRB- for specific health problems . Some insurance companies haveguaranteedissue policies that ask no health questions but are expensive . Some companies offer a graded death benefit policy that pays you an increasing death benefit the longer you own the policy . Usually in the first year or two they will return your premiums paid plus interest . Then they will pay an increasing amount of the death benefit purchased until they reach 100 % of the face amount requested -LRB- generally with in 5-10 years -RRB- . There are two other possible options to look for if you are denied insurance . 1 . -RRB- Are you working ? Does the company that you work for have a life insurance plan they offer to their employees ? If not , would they be willing to look into one for the company ? 2 . -RRB- Remember Life insurance is a cash benefit payable to your beneficiary . You may elect to invest a monthly sum that you can afford into a deferred annuity . -LRB- simply put an annuity is a way to accumulate money for future goals -RRB- . Of course , the longer you can contribute the more will be payable at your death .
You probably get solicitations in the mail all the time , or see ads on TV saying `` you can not be turned down '' . While it is true there are some `` guaranteed issue '' life insurance plans , they are quite expensive when you compare the premium to the death benefit . A special risk agent can probably save you some money and let you know if you qualify for a medically underwritten plan .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
Life insurance policies are rarely voided . There is a specified period , normally two years , during which the company can deny a death claim if it is determined that the applicant made false representations on the application . I chose the word representation deliberately . An applicant is only bound by their personal knowledge and is therefore not responsible for any diagnosis made after the application is taken . The answers to questions are based upon the knowledge of the applicant not the actual state of affairs . One of the symptoms of alcoholism is denial and if the applicant does not believe themselves to be an alcoholic and no medical professional has diagnosed them as being an alcoholic , the insurance company would be hard pressed to ever deny a claim in the first two years . After the first two years pass the company can not deny a claim .
People should not apply for life insurance policies for which they know they will be denied . You can know ahead with some policies because they have criteria that you must meet . E.g. . They may not approve if you use oxygen , or if you weigh over a certain amount . Sometimes , the only way you can know if you will be denied is by asking an agent who is familiar with that company 's underwriting guidelines . Sometimes , people apply for policies where they are not sure if they will be denied or not . I.e. . They have risk factors , but appear to meet the underwriting guidelines . It is not always possible to be able to tell ahead of time whether you will be declined or not . The final word will come from the underwriter after the underwriter reviews your medical records . One thing is certain : you can decrease your chance of being declined by using an agent who understands your health and risk factors , and who can match you up to the policy that best meets your needs . Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have a risk that might cause your life insurance to be denied . I can help you avoid an unnecessary decline and help you find an affordable policy .
Life insurance claims can be denied but it is very rare for a life insurance company to not pay the death benefit proceeds if the life insured has died and proof of death has been submitted . If death was by suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy , the claim will be investigated . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in very limited circumstances of fraud .
Life insurance has a two year contestable period after which it is extremely difficult for life insurance policies to be contested . Even during the first two years , the insurance company can only deny coverage for material misstatements -LRB- information that was withheld from , or misstated on , the application that is serious enough that it would have caused the policy to be altered or denied -RRB- . Other things that might cause a life insurance policy to be contested are questions as to whether the policy was in force at the time of death , or death as the result of suspicious circumstances -LRB- e.g.suspected suicide in the first two years , or murder of the insured by a beneficiary -RRB- . Most life insurance policies will never be contested because death will occur after the two year period . For those that are contested , very few ever result in the death benefit not being paid .
Usually , upon presentation of proof of death and a claim form , the claim is paid . However , a claim could be denied , depending on circumstances . In Canada , a claim within the first 2 years could be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . This essentially means you did not tell or disclose the truth on something that would have changed an underwriting decision . After 2 years you would have to have committed fraud which is much more difficult to prove . A life insurance contract should be approached as a contract of utmost good faith where all parties give full disclosure . In other words , be sure and tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth . Suicide within the first 2 years or last reinstatement would also cause a claim to be denied . If there was an accidental death rider , then that portion of the claim would not be paid unless the death is deemed accidental . . Laws are similar , but vary by jurisdiction . You should check the wording in your policy , your local insurance act and , if necessary , a lawyer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Assuming that all the cards are on the table and the agent really knows what they are doing , declines should not happen too often . But even in that case , here are some reasons people can be denied life insurance . 1 -RRB- Medical reasons that even they may not realize or think about when they talk to their agent . E.g. . The applicant takes two medications for depression , which is insurable . But when the underwriter looks at the medical records , they find that the patient has recently expressed suicidal thoughts to their psychiatrist , and the policy is denied . 2 -RRB- Insufficient medical information . E.g. . The underwriter wants to see the results of an MRI and no one can find it . 3 -RRB- Tobacco with a serious health condition that is impacted by smoking . E.g. Someone says they quit smoking when they had a heart attack a year ago , but then tobacco is found in lab results . 4 -RRB- Financial reasons . E.g. . The applicant is in the middle of bankruptcy proceedings , has a very poor credit rating , and owes back taxes . Rather than calling this a decline , it is often called a postponement . 5 -RRB- Wrong product . This is the most common reason for decline I hear about when people come to us after being declined elsewhere . They were just told to apply with a product that clearly does not work with their health and personal details . That is a completely avoidable reason for being denied . As you can see by the examples above , some people would be better off going with a No Exam policy to lessen their chances of being denied . Others are better off using medically underwritten coverage . Using an agency that specializes in taking cases declined by others can help you get an approval the first time .
Why do people get denied life insurance ? The biggest reason that people get denied is because the policy they applied for is not one that they qualify for . They may not qualify because their health , their age , or even their income does not fit the guidelines for that policy . The sad thing is , many declines could be prevented by visiting with knowledgeable agents who understand what products best fit each person 's situation . And many less people would be declined if they would answer the agent 's questions without trying to hide things . Those things usually catch up with you in the end , so it is much less frustrating to get them all out in the open at the start and allow your agent to find you a policy that you indeed can get and not be denied .
Yes , life insurance in force at the death of the life insured pays out the death benefit proceeds once proof of death has been submitted . The life insurer can not deny a claim unless due to either suicide in the first two policy years or a material misrepresentation in the first two years of the policy . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . Life insurance is something you need to qualify for in advance - the insured must be insurable , the owner must have an insurable interest , etc. . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in cases of fraud .
The short answer is it depends . When you turn 65 and start your Medicare Part B you will get a 6 month window where you can choose any Medigap Insurance Plan you like . There will be no health questions and you can not be denied . After you turn 65 and are past the 6 month window of signing up for Medicare Part B then you can still get a Medigap Plan . With most carriers there will be 10-12 health questions that you will need to answer in order to get approved . Working with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance will help you to choose the insurance carrier that fits your health situation the best . Most of the health questions are centered around big and recent health issues . I would not be concerned with getting denied I would just contact an expert to help you through the process . Once you have a Medigap Insurance it is guaranteed renewable which means it can never be canceled on you as long as you pay the premiums . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
There are a variety of reasons why life insurance would be denied to a potential insured applying for coverage : Medical issues , no financial justification , the recreational activities are too dangerous , there is no insurable interest , the travel destination during the next two years is too dangerous , the driving record is too egregious , drug abuse , vocation hazard , etc. . There are reasons that a death claim would be denied like fraud or suicide in the first two years . In the first two years after the policy has been kept in force there is a contestability period for suicide , misrepresentation and fraud . Keep in mind that certain life insurance companys death claim due diligence processes may continue after the two year contestability period based on some forms of fraud and criminal activity surrendering the insureds death . If it feasible that a life insurance company to experience financial problems , fall into receivership of the state -LRB- a form of bankruptcy -RRB- and affect claims paying ability .
Two things may happen after you receive a DUI conviction : You can expect to see higher auto insurance premiums with any company . You may receive a letter of none renewal from most standard auto insurance companies . You will see a significant increase in premium from a non-standard insurance company at time of renewal , Call the MVA of DMV in your state to see how this affects you driving privileges . You may be denied a Job offer . You may be denied life insurance with some companies . It is not good in either case .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
Yes . They can deny you as long as the reason is not discriminatory . Insurer 's have specific sets of rules that they file with the states they operate in , that dictate who will be able to get what sorts of rates . As long as they apply those same rules fairly to everyone they can turn you down if you do n't fit their profile . If you are having trouble getting insurance due to driving record , criminal convictions etc , most states have a high risk pool that will accept anyone , but the rates may be very high . The insurance company that denies you does have to provide you a reason why they are denying you !
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Use PPO Health Insurance ?
PPO stands for Preferred Provider Organization and is today the most common provider network arrangement associated with most health insurance plans and is the least restrictive on the actions of its subscribers/members . In simplest terms the health insurance carrier negotiates a payment contract with a medical system that makes it 's affiliated physicians , facilities and other providers the `` in-network '' providers where people who enroll in that insurance company 's products will receive the highest level of benefits/coverage . Generally PPO 's allow their members to directly access the health care system at any level and as long as you are using a provider who is in the PPO network the member receives the higher in-network level of benefits . This means that there is little or no gatekeeper mechanism in place that requires the member to receive a referral from their primary care physician in order to see a specialist or obtain other more complex medical services . For the consumer to effectively use PPO health insurance they should learn how to determine whothe in-network providers are for their health plan -LRB- most easily done by going online to the insurance company 's web site -RRB- and to use those providers for their health care needs . A word of caution , this is a time of rapid change and , in many cases , consolidation of physician 's practices in the world of health care . As such , physicians and other health care service providers are shifting around at an unprecedented level . So , just because you remember Doctor X as being in a certain provider network from 2 or 3 years ago is no guarantee that they are in the same relationship today . It is up to the consumer in the PPO environment to make sure they are using an in-network provider and they should verify this before receiving services from a health care provider .
PPO is not a type of health insurance . It is an abbreviation for Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- which describes the network provider contracting approach associated with whatever health insurance plan you are purchasing . PPO network based health insurance products have dominated the marketplace for many years so it is not unusual for the consumer to blend the two . After January 1 , 2014 you will want to have your health insurance agent check for you , or if you are a `` do it yourselfer `` do someresearching online to determine the type of provider network associated with health plans you may be interested in . The traditional features of PPO plan designs have been to have office visit & prescription copayments , lower deductibles , higher co-insurance levels and lower out-of-pocket financial exposure for using in-network PPO providers while still having coverage for voluntary usage of non-network providers at reduced benefit levels . PPO plans are the dominant network arrangement in the current health insurance marketplace . However , changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , are causing insurance carriers to re-design their products and this does extend to the design of their provider networks . This is especially true of the health insurance products sold in the government health insurance marketplaces where the consumer may encounter multiple network or sub-network type provider arrangements in this environment . For instance , here in Tennessee , the BC/BS plan offers essentially the same insurance products with pricing based on your choice of 3 different PPO networks at 3 different price points . The larger the PPO provider network you choose the higher the insurance premium associated with the product . In fact , the smallest of the 3 BC/BS network options is offered only in the government marketplace . So , these are words of caution , there are degrees of difference even within what are technically PPO based products these days . Do n't just assume that a provider is going to be in-network with an insurance carrier based upon your past experience . Verify with both the insurance carrier and the doctor 's office that they are a participating provider . Also , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace starting in 2014 , you will want to be aware of the growing move back to Point-of-Service -LRB- POS -RRB- , Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- and Accountable Care Organization -LRB- ACO -RRB- based provider delivery systems associated with a growing number of health insurance products . These other variations on the theme apply more stringent guidelines to provider access in a variety of ways -LRB- reduced network sizes , gate keeper referral arrangements , sharply reduced or no out-of-network coverage -RRB- and introduce entirely new considerations for the consumer .
PPO stands for Preferred Provider Organization and is today the most common provider network arrangement associated with most health insurance plans and is the least restrictive on the actions of its subscribers/members . In simplest terms the health insurance carrier negotiates a payment contract with a medical system that makes it 's affiliated physicians , facilities and other providers the `` in-network '' providers where people who enroll in that insurance company 's products will receive the highest level of benefits/coverage . Generally PPO 's allow their members to directly access the health care system at any level and as long as you are using a provider who is in the PPO network the member receives the higher in-network level of benefits . This means that there is little or no gatekeeper mechanism in place that requires the member to receive a referral from their primary care physician in order to see a specialist or obtain other more complex medical services . For the consumer to effectively use PPO health insurance they should learn how to determine whothe in-network providers are for their health plan -LRB- most easily done by going online to the insurance company 's web site -RRB- and to use those providers for their health care needs . A word of caution , this is a time of rapid change and , in many cases , consolidation of physician 's practices in the world of health care . As such , physicians and other health care service providers are shifting around at an unprecedented level . So , just because you remember Doctor X as being in a certain provider network from 2 or 3 years ago is no guarantee that they are in the same relationship today . It is up to the consumer in the PPO environment to make sure they are using an in-network provider and they should verify this before receiving services from a health care provider .
This is really a question of what you prefer . An HMO describes a plan that pays it 's doctors and other providers a flat fee per patient . You must choose a primary care physician and they are responsible for your care . They usually do n't get to bill for their services , they have to make do with what they get . They will be your first call or visit and will manage your referrals and other care . They are usually part of a hospitals system and your inpatient care will be within that hospital system . You have less control over the providers you utilize than with a PPO . A PPO is n't really a health insurance plan , it 's a network of physicians , hospitals and other providers . Many health insurance companies may utilize a PPO to control their costs . This is a fee for service arrangement where the provider bills the company for your care and you must use the hospitals in the network to get your highest benefit level . You can usually chose your doctors and hospitals and you have more control than with an HMO . The health insurance companies save money by using a PPO because the providers have to agree to get paid on the PPO 's fee schedule to gain access to the patients . Historically , and HMO is less expensive than a plan using a PPO . This is because the HMO has more control over your care and they also have more control over a providers compensation . This is really a question of preference . If you 're OK with the HMO dictating where you go and who you see for your care , this would be a great option for you and you 'll probably save some money . However , If you 'd like to be the one to choose who you see for your care , you 'd probably be more comfortable with a PPO arrangement . Just realize that you 'll probably have to pay a little more for that freedom .
It 's not so much what it covers , but what it is . A PPO in long form is a Preferred Provider Organization . What that means is the PPO is a network of doctors -LRB- all types -RRB- belonging to a group -LRB- PPO -RRB- that discount their services for insureds that use them . The idea behind PPO is to encourage insureds to use those doctors in the network by offering lower costs and/or better coverage within the network . The PPO and the insurance companies have made pre-arrangements for payment for services . The doctors accept less in payment because the insurance plan design will encourage insureds to use the PPO network . Hope this helps . As far as coverage , a PPO could cover a variety of things in the plan design .
Which is best an HMO or PPO ? Actually as far as health care goes , both are very similar . Both offer the benefits laid out by law of your state , or currently what the Federal Government requires . The difference comes down to how they are used for services . A Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- uses what is commonly called a gatekeeper system . A gatekeeper is a primary care doctor who the insured works with first and referrals are generated by this primary care doctor . If you use an HMO system you will direct your care through this gatekeeper . A Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- is a network of doctors and specialists who have contracted with a medical plan to provide services to members of that plan . A PPO offers SELF DIRECTED choices for the insured . The insured decides whom they wish to see . If they want to see a specialist , they call the specialist and set up the appointment themselves . Which is better ? Depends entirely on who is using their plans and what they want from a plan .
A Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- is a way in which medical care is delivered . If the health plan you are under is administered by a PPO it means that you may take advantage of the services of a selected group of physicians , hospitals etc. . The providers who are a part of the PPO have agreed on the charges that they will make to the insurance company . They usually are reduced from the normal fees . If you elect to go to a provider who is not a part of your network , the company might honor the claim , however , the payout to the provider might be less than the amount charged . The difference would then be yours to complete . There are other ways that this can be handled but the key is that the group in the PPO delivers medical care at a reduced charge , to you and to the insurance company and that if you go outside the PPO it will cost you more in most cases .
It depends a lot on what state you are in . Humana does have HMO & PPO Medicare Advantage plans . However , people often confuse what they know about health insurance prior to turning 65 with health insurance after they turn 65 . There are big differences . It is no longer about HMO or PPO . All Medicare Advantage , HMO & PPO are basically in the same category which is a Medicare Advantage plan . It really becomes a question of do you want a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- ? One of the great features of a Medicare Supplement plan is there is `` no network '' so you can go to any doctor or hospital in any state you want . If they take Medicare they will take the Medicare Supplement regardless of carrier .
Medicare Blue PPO is a Prefered Provider Health Insurance or Medicare Advantage Plan offered by one of the Blue Cross / Blue Shield family of companies . With a PPO you can go to any doctor who accepts Medicare but you pay lower copay 's if you stay in the network . Many companies offer PPO 's .
The main difference is an HMO -LRB- Health Maintenance Organization -RRB- has a more restricted network and you may need to have a designated primary care physician for your plan . Also , if you need to go see a specialist , you will likely need a referral from your primary care physician in most circumstances . A PPO -LRB- Preferred Provider Organization -RRB- will generally have a broader network and would not require a referral to see a specialist . The premiums for PPO plans will generally be higher than an HMO . If you can afford a higher premium , you may want to go the PPO route . If you have a very tight budget and you need to keep your premiums to a much lower figure , an HMO may be more suitable . Also , you may not have many options for health insurance in some areas . You 're generally going to have more options living in an urban area than a very rural one - not every carrier will offer every network type either under the new affordable care act . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies from person to person and many factors can go into it such as personal preference , where you live , do you travel , and premium tolerance , just to name a few . PPO networks are much larger than HMO networks - HMO networks feature a more restricted network and you can pay higher costs for going to out-of-network doctors . The premiums for PPO plans will generally be higher because of this . If you can afford a higher premium , you may want to go the PPO route . If you have a very tight budget and you need to keep your premiums to a much lower figure , an HMO may be more suitable . Also , you may not have many options for health insurance in some areas . You 're generally going to have more options living in an urban area than a very rural one - not every carrier will offer every network type either under the new affordable care act .
There are several ways to determine if your health insurance plan is an HMO or PPO : 1 . Sometimes that information is shown right on your insurance card or in the plan name 2 . You can look up your plan information online or go through the material your carrier sent you 3 . Last resort is to contact your agent or the carrier and ask them ! HMO 's require you to use network doctors and specialists and `` most '' require a referral to a network specialist from your Primary Care Physician -LRB- PCP -RRB- , who is also in the network . If you are in a PPO , you `` may '' be required to have a PCP , but you are not required to get a referral to a specialist : you can go to any specialist you choose , as long as they are in the PPO network . In either case , you `` may '' be responsible for up to 100 % of the expenses if you go to a doctor that is not in the network . Best bet is to call your agent or carrier !
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Although this seems like a simple question there are a lot of variables : Where does the 20 year old live ? How does he/she use health care ? What type of health insurance , HMO or PPO ? What metal tier ? Bronze , Gold , Silver or Platinum The best way to answer your question is to suggest that you talk to a licensed and certified health insurance agent . The agent will ask you a number of questions and obtain quotes from various health insurance carriers . The simple answer is health insurance should cost between $ 200 and $ 350 a month .
Many health insurance companies offer both PPOs and HMOs . In general , HMO policies tend to be less expensive , while also including many more restrictions on your benefits , especially in terms of which medical providers you can use . PPOs tend to be more expensive , but also offer you the option to see a much wider variety of medical providers , usually without the need for a referral before seeking care from any specialists .
The most common types of health insurance are HMO 's -LRB- Health Maintenance Organizations -RRB- and PPO 's -LRB- Preferred Provider Networks -RRB- . With HMO 's , you have a primary doctor who refers you to specialists . Also , you must receive your care within the network except in emergencies . With PPO 's , you can go directly to specialists . You can go outside of your network and still receive a benefit , but you receive more benefit if you stay within the network . There are also EPO 's -LRB- Exclusive Provider Networks -RRB- , which are basically like an HMO , except you can go directly to a specialist without a referral .
It ultimately comes down to what 's right for you . HMOs -LRB- Health Maintenance Organizations -RRB- and PPOs -LRB- Preferred Provider Organizations -RRB- each have their benefits and everyone has their own preferences and coverage benefit desires and premium tolerance . Cost is a big factor for just about everyone so it 's important to look at what each type offers and what 's available in your area . With an HMO plan , you designate a doctor to be your primary care physician -LRB- PCP -RRB- . All of your health care services are coordinated through your PCP . That means that you need a referral before you can see a specialist or other health care provider -LRB- except in an emergency -RRB- . The doctors you visit must be in network - out-of-network doctors typically are n't covered . PPO plans offer more flexibility . You 're not required to designate a PCP and you can go see a specialist without a referral - inside or outside of your network.Staying inside your network means smaller copays and full coverage . If you see a physician outside of your network , you may have a higher out-of-pocket share , and not all services may be covered . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Although there are several ways to qualify `` best '' , I will try to adress some of the most popular views of what would be best . If you are refering to the best coverage then a `` Platnum '' plan - 90 % coinsurance coverage from the insurance company , with little to no deductable , this type of coverage would be structured as a PPO plan . If you are refering to the best coverage at the lowest cost then a Consumer Directed Health Plan would be the best way to ballance the two opposing variables . CDHP 's are health insurance policies that combine a variety of different structuring options -LRB- PPO , POS , HMO , etc. . -RRB- , however they have a high deductable that must be meet before the policies coinsurance would cover many medical services -LRB- except for routine , and preventitive care -RRB- . The high deductable reduces the cost of the plan and is offset by a Medical Savings/Expense account .
Medicare Plus Blue PPO is a Medicare Supplemental Plan insurance provider in Michigan . It is an arm of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Blue Care Network of Michigan . To find out more about the health insurance offered by Medicare Plus Blue PPO visit their website at WEBSITELINK .
PPO refers to apreferredprovider organization , which is simply a network of physicians , hospitals , treatment centers and other providers and facilities that have pre negotiated rates for servicesrendered . As the back bone of all Major Medical Health Insurance in our country a quality plan should also have a quality PPO Network attached to it .
end question
start question
home-insurance
When Can You Switch Homeowners Insurance ?
Most insurers will allow you to cancel coverage and replace coverage at any time . The company whose policy is being cancelled may charge either a minimum earned premium or a `` short rate '' cancellation but they will refund the balance of the paid premium . Mortgage companies work with this routinely . In summary you should determine the price on the new policy and then determine the cost , if any , of canceling the existing policy before making a decision .
This is a common question most people have and the answer is yes , you can switch your insurance at any time . There is no mandate which states that you can not switch your insurance but the question is should you switch your insurance ? There are several things you want to consider before switching your auto insurance . The most common reason people switch their insurance is because of price . You will find that most states file insurance rates in January and June . So keep in mind depending on when you decide to switch your policy you could be hitting a price increase or decrease depending on what the state has filed . Switching your insurance once or even several times could actually hurt you . Companies are beginning to offer discounts such as loyalty discounts which dont kick in until you have been with them for so many years . Even though you may be saving $ 50 - $ 100 switching to another carrier you could be losing a lot more than that by not staying with your current insurance company . You may find loyalty discounts to range from 5 % -20 % depending on the company which could save you hundreds of dollars . But every situation is different so be sure to consider when your switching your insurance and what discounts you may or may not be losing .
You can switch your auto policy at any time . The most popular motivation to switch insurance carriers is price . People are looking for the best price for there insurance all the time . Other reasons to switch would be a new car purchase or moving to a new state . Switching carriers is easy and there are many to choose from . Shopping your auto insurance around is a great idea to compare prices . Using and agent can help you find insurance carriers that you normally would not have access to but going direct to and insurer online is also beneficial cutting out a middle man and getting quotes instantly . Be sure to check the term dates , is it six months or a year policy ? This can effect the way you compare the premiums . You will want to match your old coverage with your new quotes . Make sure the coverages are the same or similar this can prevent a coverage gap where you thought you had coverage . If you new vehicle is n't so new any more you may want to lower the amount of coverage on a particular vehicle . This can help lower your premium on the new policy or you can amend you current one . So while you can switch you insurer at any time do your research and make sure that it works in your favor .
You are allowed to switch from a Medicare Advantage plan under certain conditions . If you are 65 or older and have been on Medicare Part B for less than 6 months you can switch to original Medicare and a Medigap . If you are in your Advantage trial right period , you can switch to Medigap . If you can pass underwriting requirements , you can switch to Medigap .
In most circumstances it probably doesnt make any difference when you switch auto policies . Cancellations are treated on a pro-rata basis by many insurance companies . Doing a switch at renewal might be easiest , though . When considering a switch there are two things to consider . The first is the effect dropping coverage with one company might have on the premiums of other insurance policies that might have been bundled . The second is that switching frequently to save a few dollars does not allow you to develop any relationship with the agent , who might be your best friend at the time of a claim .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
There is no fee that I am aware of to switch from one insurance company to another . The only reason that I am aware of that you want to switch insurance companies is lower cost . If there is a fee involved then you probably will not switch insurance companies . There is no fee to my knowledge to switch
As often as you like if you are referring to the actual policy . If you are referring to the writing company , you are free to search the market every year . Normally you will see homeowners insurance policies creep up every year . This is because most policies have an inflation guard built into the policy . It is designed to cover the increased cost of construction over time . Typically it is about 3 % -6 % . It can become a hassle to switch your homeowners insurance on a yearly basis because the company will come out and perform an inspection and can cancel the policy if they see something they do n't like . Also , eventually you will run out of companies to switch from/to . I would look to your independent insurance agent for the best advice .
When you buy a home insurance policy , its not a contract for life . If you are unhappy with your current coverage , you can easily switch to a new home insurance company . Before making this move , there are just a few things you need to do beforehand . The first thing you should do is review your current insurance policy . See when it is scheduled to end as well as if there are any costs for ending your contract early . For example , if you cancel a prepaid policy , some companies give you your unearned premium payments back while others will not . Check to see if it makes more financial sense to cancel the policy or just wait for it to expire . When you decide to make a move , you can contact your new insurance company and ask them to set up your new policy . You will need to fill out a short application to set up your coverage . When you submit your application , be sure to include your insurance premium as well . You wont be covered until after the insurance company receives your premium payment . Once your new policy is up and running , you can cancel your old policy . Call up your old company and tell them you want to end your coverage . They will mail you a document telling you your coverage is over and will also return any money they might owe you . After you finish cancelling your policy , you have finished switching home insurance companies .
You can switch your Medicare Supplement anytime you want to as long as you can pass medical underwriting . If you have any serious pre-existing health conditions you may not be able to switch to another company . If you can qualify with a new company you and your wife will probably be able to save a lot of money and still receive good coverage for the gaps in your Original Medicare Part A and Part B coverage . If you currently have a Plan F consider switching to a Plan G or Plan N.
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
While this is a serious tax question it could make sense to do this switch . A Roth IRA accumulates money for retirement and there isnt any tax on the accumulation prior to withdrawal . When you withdraw funds from a Roth IRA you will not have any taxes to pay ! Check with your accountant before making this switch as there could be serious income tax consequences in the year that you make the switch .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Yes , you can switch life insurance companies by the process of replacement , or by dropping your old policy and purchasing a new one . If you have permanent insurance with cash value , the replacement will involve a 1035 exchange to get the cash from one policy to another . Keep in mind that when you do a replacement or get a new policy , all policy provisions , surrender charges , etc start over again . The switch is not simply switching companies . Discuss it with the agent for your old company before making your decision .
Insurance is regulated by state . Each state can adopt a different approach to the issue that you have raised . In California , the voters took rating matters into their own hands with a constitutional amendment . Sex or gender , as you say , is not a rating factor in California . That means that in California if you switch sex , switch back and switch again , nothing will change as long as you are residing in California , and driving a car insured in California .
You can switch health insurance pans while pregnant , but make sure to do your due diligence first . If you are increasing benefits and lowering maternity out-of-pocket costs then switching would be a great idea . On the other side of that argument , if you 're happy with your current plan and benefits you may find staying where you are until the baby is born serves you better . In the new arena of health reform and individual health insurance you can only switch during open enrollment or if you qualify for a special enrollment due to a life changing event . It 's best -LRB- pregnant or not -RRB- to find the right program and stick with it throughout the year to avoid headaches . For more information on how maternity is covered under Obamacare plans please visit www.clminsure.com
Switching homeowner 's insurance is relatively easy to do and most times , you can change at a date that is suitable to you . The biggestconcernis whether the new company will accept your application . Assuming you have few or no claims , and meet their underwriting guidelines , you should be able to switch . Just as importantly is the issue of whether it is a good idea to change . As an independentbroker , that 's part of our job is todetermineif making a change makes good financial sense for you . If not , you should stay put .
You can switch Medigap policies at any time , but it is important to understand potential obstacles . If you are outside of your Medigap open enrollment period -LRB- the 6-month period that begins on the first day of the month in which you 're 65 or older and enrolled in Part B -RRB- , then you will likely have to go through health underwriting to switch to a new plan or insurance company . Some companies do allow you to change your Medigap Plan if you remain with them , e.g. going from a Plan F to a Plan G , without new health underwriting ; but if you change insurance companies you will have to answer all health questions on the application . A new insurance company may deny you coverage based upon evaluation of your current health , so you may not be able to switch your Medigap policy to a new company . It is important to work with a licensed and experienced agent who can place you with a reputable company for the long term when you are in your Medigap open enrollment period .
As long as you work with a broker who understands the process , it 's very easy to switch homeowners insurance . Remember that your mortgage company will need to be advised of this change . Also remember that your homeowners insurance may be part of your mortgage payment , so it 's important to make sure the escrow is straightened out properly . It 's also very important that you not cancel your old homeowners insurance until you have evidence of the new policy starting .
Most people consider it to be a Fixed Annuity that has a level guaranteed interest rate over the entire surrender charge period . Some Fixed Annuities have a guaranteed rate for part of the surrender period , and then switch to what they call a `` current '' rate . The `` Current Rate '' can vary with market conditions . Most Annuities that are considered `` cd type '' Annuities , have a guaranteed rate during the surrender period . Then it switches to the current rate once there are no more surrender charges . But at this time , if the owner does not like the current rate , they are free to switch to a different product with no surrender charges/fees .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Which Auto Insurance Company Is The Best ?
If you are looking for the best insurance company for you , I would suggest speaking with friends and family about their experiences with various companies and agents . Remember the insurance company is only one part of the equation , the agent is the other part . It is important that you have an agent that you trust and that you feel has your best interest in mind when it comes to your insurance coverage .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
No one auto insurer has the best product for all people all the time . And auto insurance carriers have varying appetites for risk that varies greatly on a regional basis . Therefore no one can categorically declare one auto insurer best for all residents of one state . Your best bet is to seek out the guidance of an agent who is licensed to write auto insurance in your state and have him or her show you numerous quotes for auto insurance so you can determine which is best for you .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
In addition to what was stated above , auto insurance can go up due to legislative reform . In some states there is a catastrophic claims division , which will reimburse insurance companies if they have excessive claims . This fund is collected through your auto-insurance carrier , but goes into a state fund . For example , Michigan has the Michigan Catastrophic Claims Association -LRB- MCCA -RRB- , which costs roughly $ 176/yr . per auto . My best advice is to review your bill with your agent and figure out which costs are incurred because of state regulations and which costs come from your insurance provider . Once you have sorted these out you can then figure out if anything can be done to lower your overall insurance costs .
You will find renters insurance to be very inexpensive . With most companies renter insurance covering approximately $ 5,000 to $ 10,000 in personal contents and $ 300,000 in personal liability to be approximately $ 150 to $ 300 dollars a year which is equivalent to about $ 12.50 to $ 25 dollars a month . Depending on the carrier this could vary . By writing a renters policy not only are you getting coverage for your personal belongings but you are also getting personal liability coverage . Some companies also include additional coverage such as host liquor liability , which you would need to rent halls for events like a wedding or a birthday . You may also be able to schedule things such as your cell phone which may or may not be cheaper then purchasing the coverage from your cell phone carrier . You will find that if you purchase your renters policy through the same carrier as your auto insurance that the discount you receive on your auto insurance will more than pay for your renters policy . Multi-policy discounts with some companies can range from 5 % -20 % or possibly more , which can save you hundreds on your auto insurance . So be sure to talk to your insurance agent about writing a renters policy and what discounts are available .
You can have two auto policies but not on the same car . I have many clients that own small business and they have a business auto policy and a personal auto policy which then gives them a multi policy discount on the personal auto and cost them much less per auto and the business auto they use the insurance premium as a business expense on their taxes .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
Technically no , you do not have to own the title of the car in order to insure it . This is based upon the basic insurance premise that you have to have an interest in something in order to insure it . Interest , however , is not specifically defined . For example , you can rent a car , which is in your care , custody and control you can have it covered under your personal auto policy . Or , a business can insure non-owned autos , which covers its employees and their personal autos when being used for business . In summary , you just have to have an insurable interest to insure a car , which does not necessarily mean ownership .
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
All insurance auto policies are the same they all have liability which is damage to other . Then you have optional coverage of un insured and under insured and medical pay then of course the option of `` Full '' coverage which really is not the best choice of words for coverage but that is coverage that repairs your auto in the even of a loss minus the deductible . The best coverage would be to have higher limits and full coverage . How ever you budget needs to thought about also . If you are purchasing all the coverage and ca n't afford the higher deductible then full coverage may not be the best option for you . Before you ever purchase a car or insurance shop around call a local agent and discuss what options you have . Many agencies demand that you have certain limits which is recommended to have the higher limits but it is pointless if you ca n't afford the higher limits because if it means eating or insurance well you going to choose food . Talk to an agent who will listen to your concerns and find you the most affordable rate and coverage that your desire . Online quotes can sometime be lower but the service sometimes is not as well as an agent example at our agency you can reach us 24/7 we never want you to ever have to call a 800 number and talk to a stranger .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
It depends . What is your specific situation - how many vehicles do you have , how many drivers are in your household ? Do any drivers have any tickets or accidents in the last 3 years ? Do you own a home and/or have other assets ? These are just a few of the questions that we 'll look to get answered to help us determine the best path for you.Please understand that there are several great auto insurance companies here in Texas ; every situation is unique and has it 's own factors that will determine how to proceed in securing the best autoinsurance coverage for your unique situation . I guess the best answer is which auto insurance company can best fit and satisfy your current situation and current needs?Give us a call at 469.206.8048 or you can e-mail me at WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your situation to get you the protection you need .
There are many excellent life insurance companies to choose from and the `` best '' is very subjective . One way to rate companies is by the financial ratings from AM Best or a similar rating company . I personally only use A rated companies or better , so my clients can feel confident that the life insurance company will be around 20 - 30 years or longer when the policy is needed . Many life insurance companies have been around over 100 years which is another testament to a stable company . A company may be the best for you because they offer a particular product with a unique rider that you want . Finally , a company that provides a better health rating , and therefore lower premium for your situation , may turn out to be the best for you . All of the above are reasons to work with a knowledgeable advisor to help you sort through the options and find the best company for your particular situation .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Can I Get Health Insurance ?
Since the open enrollment period has passed , I believe your only option would be short term health insurance , just to get you buy until the end of this year . The availability of short term health insurance will vary depending on what state you live in . Feel free to email me with your city , state , and zip code and I may be able to point you in the right direction . My email is WEBSITELINK
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! And an interesting one . I guess the answer depends upon how long you 've had the policy , and how well you 've kept track of it ; or whether it is a good policy to get at all , if I 'm reading into your question rightly . Here 's what I advise people . A UL policy can be a good thing if you are somebody that keeps an eye on everything , and has extra money lying around . You also have to have a healthy risk tolerance . Agents will rightly tell you that this type of policy can bring great returns , but press them hard , and make them tell you exactly what stars and moons need to align for that to happen . What is the actual performance of the policy over time , not the best case scenario printed in the sales brochure ? How much over the minimum payment is required to achieve that performance ? That 's what you need to know if you are thinking of purchasing one . If you already have one , are you paying attention to how well it is still funded ? You could be in for a surprise if you have n't . Call your agent , and get an idea of how it 's doing for you , and how long you can expect it to be in force . Functionally , you can use the proceeds for everything that you would any other whole life insurance policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
That is an excellent question ! There are a couple of things that will determine how quickly you can obtain your license . The first is how quickly you can become enrolled in , and complete your State required training class . -LRB- There may also be company required training that you might need to complete before being able to sell , btw ... -RRB- You will also need to schedule and take your State exam , and get your fingerprinting and background checks done . It is a really wise idea to look into getting your Errors & Omissions insurance while in the process also , so that you can hit the ground running once licensed . So depending upon how well you learn and test , and how easy it is to get everything scheduled , you can expect your licensing within a couple of weeks , to a cople of months . If you would like to know how it went for me , please contact me , and I 'll talk to you privately about it . Thank you for asking !
I can give you some examples from cases I have handled . I think you will be surprised . Many people assume they will not qualify for life insurance , and happily , they are wrong . It takes a lot . One fellow needed to purchase several million dollars of life insurance to cover a bank loan for his business . His business was a bar/restaurant . The night before his insurance exam , a few of his buddies came by to socialize a bit . They did cocaine . Of course , he tested positive . No insurance for him . He probably would have qualified for a guaranteed-issue burial policy . But the $ 25,000 would not have done him any good . He needed that bank loan . And he needed life insurance to get it . And you know what ? He didnt get the life insurance , and he didnt get the bank loan . He would have had to wait a few years before he became eligible again . Five years is the industry standard , but I probably couldve gotten it for him sooner . Another candidate also a business owner went to rehab for both drug and alcohol addiction . Unfortunately , he didnt schedule the necessary follow-ups after his treatment . Carriers were worried that a relapse would be right around the corner without the proper support system in place . He will also have to wait a year or two . Then you have people who have a number of serious illnesses that just arent sufficiently controlled . The combination of obesity , heart condition , diabetes , smoking etc. is wicked . Ive had people come to me with these factors in place , and then some . Has to be some measure of control . Otherwise , you look like a walking timebomb . These cases are extreme . Other cases seem scary but can be quite placeable . Pot smoking ? You can get a policy . Bankruptcy ? You can get a policy . On probation for a felony ? You can get a policy . Suspended drivers license ? You can get a policy . Travel to India , or South America , or rural China ? You can get a policy . Mountain climber ? You can get a policy . Deep water scuba diver ? You can get a policy . Of course , a number of important factors need to be in place , but on the overall , it can be done . Surprise !
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
When Is Best Time To Buy Long Term Care Insurance ?
Long term care is generally addressed by advisers around age 50 . But most Americans purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . You could consider purchasing long term care insurance when you 're young and healthy , if your family health history shows a predisposition to chronic health or nursing home confinement in their early senior years .
It is best to buy long term care insurance by age 60 so that you can take advantage of the lower rates that younger ages offer , and also so that you can hopefully precede any health conditions that often occur at older ages . The underwriting for Long Term Care Insurance is stricter than Life Insurance , so applying while able to qualify is important .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards . Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
People buy long term care insurance to protect their assets in case they should need to pay for expensive care for themselves for an extended period of time -LRB- months to years -RRB- . When someone receives long term care , they must pay out of pocket , because Medicare does not pay it -LRB- beyond , possibly , under one month at that start , followed by 80 days of partial payment , but only if qualified -RRB- . When their liquid assets run out , they must tap into other assets , even the value of their home , if no remaining spouse lives there . When assets are nearly depleted , they can receive Medicaid funding , but not before that . Having Long Term Care insurance helps avoid that scenario , as the policy will pay for the care until policy funds run out . If a Partnership plan , assets are protected up to the amount of coverage purchased . There are other reasons buy Long Term Care Insurance , as well . One of the main ones is being able to provide for their own care of their choice , and not burdening loved ones with that worry .
Stand alone long term care insurance policies can be very expensive and generally are not a fixed premium so may well go up over time . When you purchase long term care as a rider on a whole life policy you will get the lowest premium rate for it that is available . So really then the best time to buy long term insurance is when you 're buying a whole life policy . If you already have a whole life policy without the LTC rider , you could either buy an additional policy or exchange your current policy for a new one and add the LTC rider .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is my LTD effected by husband receiving social security ?
I am not aware of any long term disability with Hartford or any other carrier that looks at household income . Your long term disability was underwritten on your income and when you met the criteria to draw benefits until you earn income , you should stay on benefit until your policy is complete .
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Your social security number and the medicare # will be the same except for the alphabetical character added to the medicare number . Why the alphabetical character ? If you are drawing benefits under your social security record -LRB- earnings -RRB- the alphabet character is A . So your social security number would be displayed XXX-XX-XXXXA . What if you are drawing your benefit coverage under your divorced husbands benefit or your husband 's benefit - that al ; habetical character changes to reflect the beneficiary you are drawing your benefit under
That is a great question ! You really want to be careful though , as long term disability and health insurance are two completely different animals . Health insurance can only be applied to your medical expenses , and insures your health . Disability insurance insures your paycheck . As such , the money it provides can be used for whatever need you have , rent , electric bill , medical bills , etc. . Could you use your LTD money to help pay for medical bills ? Absolutely . Would it replace your health insurance ? No , and I really would n't advise that you try , as your LTD payments will not be close to what your health insurance would pay , in most cases . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Guaranteed issue can be based on group benefits or a multi life census . Theres also high limit guaranteed issue beyond the traditional limits of group LTD. . Generally group benefits are short term disability insurance . Its important to have disability insurance , so these are significant opportunities to secure guaranteed coverage , especially if you have pre-existing health conditions .
You qualify for Part A by working for 40 quarters and contributing to the Social Security program . If you do not have 40 quarters you will be allowed to make payments to social security in order to obtain Part A . In the case of a spouse drawing social security benefits under he deceased husband 's benefit then she qualifies for Part A under his benefit
Traditionally group disability insurance is not portable if offered under a standard group long term disability plan -LRB- aka LTD -RRB- . However , if the policy is purchased as part of a guaranteed issue group plan , the policy may be portable by the insured , this depends on the carrier and their practices regarding such things .
IDBI stands for Industrial Development Bank of India . IDBI Federal Life Insurance Co Ltd is a joint venture of IDBI Bank -LRB- a development and commercial bank -RRB- , Federal Bank -LRB- a private sector bank -RRB- and Ageas , a multinational insurance company . IDBI Federal Life insurance is offered to the residents of India .
The biggest life insurance company in the world is Japan Post Insurance Co , Ltd. . It had over a billion dollars of non banking assets in 2010 . The biggest life insurance company in the United States is MetLife . It had over $ 730 million of non banking assets in 2010 .
Kotak Life Insurance is an Indian company . It appears to offer traditional life policies . As you may already know it has only been in the last twenty years or less that the life insurance market has opened . Previously the market was the exclusive domain of four government insurance companies . This company is a joint venture of an Indian Bank and Old Mutual Life Insurance Ltd. .
You can have two long-term disability insurance policies if your income warrants the extra coverage . Many policies contain both a percentage and hard dollar cap on monthly benefit payments . For some high income individuals , the hard dollar cap on the first policy may translate into a low percentage of income replacement . For example , a $ 5,000 monthly cap would represent 33 % income replacement for someone earning $ 180,000 per year . This happens frequently with group LTD programs . A second or supplemental policy could bring the income replacement percentage up to 66 % .
That is a difficult question to answer without more details . I can say a tentative yes , Long term disability , in a group setting usually does not provide as broad as coverage as individual plan . That is offset but the fact that group long term disability is often less expensive . Am independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you integrate an individual plan with a group ltd plan . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
I believe there are many companies that underwrite for Progressive . Progressive lists the following companies at WEBSITELINK Homesite Insurance Group Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 866-960-8609 IDS Property Casualty Insurance Company Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-892-0824 Assurant Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 866-208-0978 All Risks , LTD Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 QBE Insurance Corporation Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 American Strategic Insurance Corp Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 Occidental Fire and Casualty Company of North Carolina Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 First American Property and Casualty Insurance Group Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176
In Canada , disability insurance payments are usually structured so that the payment is tax free . This applies to individual plans as well as group plans . The basic principle is , if the premium is paid with after tax dollars , then the benefit is tax free . If the premium is deducted as an expense -LRB- employee benefit -RRB- , then the benefit payment is taxable . That is why with group insurance plans the premium split is structured so that the employee pays the Long Term Disability -LRB- LTD -RRB- portion of the premium . This is done to keep the benefit tax free . Plans can be structured to provide a benefit to employees with the company paying the premium on the policies and deducting it as an expense . Certain rules need to be followed . Here is an overview : Company pays premium for coverage , gets the deduction , employee does not pay tax on the premium `` benefit '' , but any disability benefit is taxable . In order to offset the income tax , the amount of coverage the employee is permitted to apply for is increased . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
When buying life insurance for your husband , first gather his health information : the medications he takes , his height and weight , any weight loss of over 10 pounds in the past year , and a history of health conditions he has had -LRB- including the year he was diagnosed -RRB- . If he has had a bankruptcy , felony , DUI , or other risk factors , try to recall the date it occurred and/or was discharged . Ask your husband whether he objects to taking an exam . Then , using all this information , shop for his best rate . He will need to complete and sign the application as the insured . Either of you can own the policy . The policy owner and person making the payments will also sign the application . If the policy does not need an exam , your husband may need to do a phone interview with a representative for the life insurance company . If it is a medically underwritten policy , it will require an exam to be done in your home or place of your husband 's choice . Once approved , your husband will need to sign some delivery requirements to put the policy into effect . If you are the policy owner , you will need to sign them , as well .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
You can get Medicare when you turn 65 and not receive a Social Security benefit check . Medicare Part A is free but the standard premium for Medicare Part B for 2016 is $ 121.80 . If you are not receiving a Social Security check you will have to pay the Part B premium on a quarterly basis and mail it to Social Security . Once you start receiving a Social Security check the Part B premium will be automatically deducted from your check .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Life Insurance Builds Cash Value ?
The actual cost for providing insurance for one year increases as an individual ages . In order to provide a level death benefit in exchange for a level premium , insurance companies must charge more at the younger ages to offset the cost at the older ages . This extra money becomes the cash value of a permanent life insurance policy . Permanent life insurance policies come in several stripes depending on guarantees included in the policy . The company will surrender the cash value at any time in exchange for a release from the companys promise to pay the death benefit . They will also allow the owner to borrow against the cash value of the policy .
To clarify the question : what life insurance can build cash value ? Generally , there are four types of cash value products that could generate accumulating cash values : Current Assumption Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Variable Universal life and Participating Whole Life Insurance . The performance of interest rates , indices and market equities may or may not credit any earnings and life insurance has policy expenses . Each policy owner must assess their risk tolerance for each type of life insurance contract . Participating whole life insurance base policies have guaranteed cash values . Lastly , a few guaranteed universal life insurance policies have some cash values in the later years , but should not be considered as a cash accumulation vehicle .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
The cash value is the portion of whole life insurance that has built up so far in your cash account . Think of it like money in the bank . The way whole-life is designed , it has a level premium for the length of the policy or until it is paid off . What 's really happening is as the cash account grows , the actual insured amount reduces by the same amount . You become more and more self-insured each year . If you buy $ 100,000 whole-life policy , in the begining your insured amount is $ 100,000 and your cash value is zero . Many years later your cash value is $ 40,000 and the insured amount is $ 60,000 for a total death benefit of $ 100,000 . Several more years later your cash value is $ 90,000 and the Insured amount is $ 10,000 for a death benefit of $ 100,000 If you live to age that the policy endows -LRB- usually age 95 or 100 on older policies and age 121 on newer ones -RRB- the cash value is $ 100,000 and the insured amount is zero . You are now self insured . You can use the cash value while you are living by taking policy loans which are actually loans against the cash build up in your policy not actually withdrawals from the policy or you can cash surrender the policy and walk away with the cash . If you have a participating policy that pays dividends , you can have additional cash value and death benefit build up from that .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Whole life insurance is life insurance that includes a cash value build up in the policy that reduces the financial obligation to the company . In other words , the client is self-funding the death benefit by a portion of the premium going to the cash value . As the cash value grows the less the company has to contribute to the face amount of the policy . The difference between the face amount of the policy and the cash values is the actual amount that the company pays upon the death of the policy holder . For a cash value policy to be paid-up the cash value build up has to reach a point where it equals the face amount of the policy . This increased funding of the cash value is why paid-up policies are much more expensive than standard whole life policies . As a financial professional , I only recommend term insurance to my clients that gives them 2-3 times the protection needed while building assets through debt reduction and investments in 401ks , IRAs and mutual funds . Keeping your investments separate from your insurance is the financially sound thing to do . If you have any questions please contact me @ 843-450-9879 or visit my website @ www.hinchfinancialgroup.com .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
There are two main types of life insurance . The first is term life insurance which has no cash value . Think of it as renting . The second type of life insurance is cash value life insurance . The most popular go by names like , whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . All of which have cash value that builds with time . If you have one of these types of plans , look for the pages marked `` illustrations '' . You will find a cash value column explaining how much cash is built up in a given year . Most policies allow you to take a `` cash loan '' against them and keep your coverage in force . You may also cash out completely or roll the cash value to another plan . You will find the average policy will not have cash value until coverage has been in force for about 5 years .
Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a private message if you need assistance with your program .
Term life insurance is n't necessarily better than permanent life insurance - each has their own pros and cons . In short , it depends on what you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. covering a mortgage vs. estate planning -RRB- . The big advantage of term insurance is you 're getting more `` bang for your buck '' so-to-speak - meaning the rate per $ 1,000 of coverage that you 're paying is much less than permanent coverage , however , the trade-off is that you only get to pay that rate for a short amount of time -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- whereas your rates can be locked in for life with a permanent insurance policy . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the policy changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like assistance with your program .
Whole life insurance has many advantages to it . The first being that your premiums are fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life and as a permanent insurance program , it builds cash value over time . If it 's a participating whole life policy , any dividends that are paid out can be used to either increase the death benefit via paid up additions , reduce your premium , or make a payment to you directly -LRB- options depend on which carriers whole life policy you have -RRB- . If you use the dividends to reduce the premium , the policy can become self-sustaining after a number of years - meaning no more premium payments . Non-participating policies only build cash value - these types of plans do not pay out dividends . If you 're buying whole life coverage when you 're young and its cash value builds for years and years , it can create a nice nest egg for funds that can be used during your retirement years . It 's important to remember that if you borrow from an insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the monies are expected to be paid back . If you cash out the policy , you lose the life insurance coverage . An alternative for those who are not very concerned about the cash value and want to maximize the death benefit of your life insurance , you may want to consider a guaranteed universal life policy instead of whole life . GULs can offer a larger amount of coverage than whole life policies for the same premium or save you a ton of money on your premiums for a given level of coverage . Make sure to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can create a structure that will best serve your needs , goals , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Uses Long Term Care Insurance ?
People who use long term insurance as a benefit -LRB- current policyholders -RRB- are those who satisfy the triggers that enable them to collect on it . These include being unable to do two or three ADL 's -LRB- bathing , dressing , etc independently -RRB- and/or cognitive impairment . Most policies now require that the expectation of need for that care will last at least 90 days .
Who uses Long Term Care Insurance ? Mainly anyone who wants to have a say in their care if the need for assisted care arises . Most of the people who chose to purchase long term care do so to protect their assets and choice of where their care comes from . Depending on the plan purchased , care could be provided in a care facility or even maybe via visiting nurses and home health care .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Everyone comes into the discussion about long term care insurance from a different angle , because we all have different experiences . As an insurance website , we rightfully describe the financial implications of the products in question . But as human beings , we interject our experiences , as well . Some of us see it from the view of the caregiver/family , having been caregivers by default for a parent who did not have long term care insurance , or watched our `` healthy '' parent struggle to care for the sick one . Some of us have adult children urging us to get long term care insurance because they know that they would have to give up homes and jobs to come care for us . Some of us see it from the view of the person needing the care . Time spent in a nursing home quickly reveals those who could have had a higher quality life living in their own home , with the resources that LTC insurance provides . There are the `` rich '' in the single room whose resources are dwindling with each passing year , and who may eventually not be able to sustain that luxury of a private room by having to go on Medicaid . No matter what angle from which you view it , there are good reasons to get long term care insurance . There are also reasons not to get it , as Mr. Bridgers so eloquently stated about both sides .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
My clients who are over the age of 55 pay between $ 4,000 to $ 7,000 a year . These are clients that have no other assets to exchange for an asset based long term care annuity . My other clients who have large assets will exchange them for a long term care annuity with guaranteed benefits , guaranteed growth on the principle and a guaranteed death benefit . They do not have to use the annuity for a specific long term care need . It is just another to pay for long term care without losing principle . Long term care insurance is a racket . The riders , the definitions and some companies just do n't have a good contract for those who need to pay premiums instead of exchanging assets .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
Long Term Disability and Long Term Care have similar names , so it is easy to see how they can be confused . Long Term Disability is for those who are employed , and the benefit they receive would replace part of the income lost by suffering a long term disability . Long Term Care is for those who are in need of skilled care , and the benefit received either goes straight to the institution providing the care , or to the person receiving the care , to use as they wish .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Palmetto Gba Medicare ?
Palmetto GBA -LRB- Government Benefits Administrators -RRB- is a wholly owned subsidiary of BlueCrossBlueShield of South Carolina . The company is headquartered in Columbia , SC . Palmetto GBA has administered complex transaction processing for the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid -LRB- CMS -RRB- since the inception of Medicare in 1965 . They have employees in 14 states .
Palmetto GBA -LRB- Government Benefits Administrators -RRB- is a wholly owned subsidiary of BlueCrossBlueShield of South Carolina . The company is headquartered in Columbia , SC . Palmetto GBA has administered complex transaction processing for the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid -LRB- CMS -RRB- since the inception of Medicare in 1965 . They have employees in 14 states .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
I believe you 're referring to where can you find out what benefits and services are covered by Medicare . The Medicare.gov website provides in-depth information about what is covered under Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- and Medicare Part B -LRB- physician insurance -RRB- and a general breakdown of what percentage of costs Medicare covers and what percentage of costs you 're responsible for paying . The Medicare & You handbook is a great tool to review as well - it 's available on the Medicare.gov website as well , but I believe you can also google it as well to find a pdf copy to download .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can You Pay Health Insurance Premiums With An HSA ?
To simplify the answer yes . A Health Savings Account is used to pay health insurance premiums , medical expenses , and any other expense incurred medically . dont confuse with Flexible Spending Account where if you dont use the money you lose the money in the account .
An HSA is one of the most affordable types of health insurance plans available to individuals and families . Typically , you pay premiums to the insurance company -LRB- a high-deductible health plan -RRB- and you can make optional deposits into your side account -LRB- The HSA -RRB- . The savings portion should be used to pay for qualified medical , dental and visionexpenses , so you can take advantage of the tax deduction . Shopping for the best options through an experienced broker will save time and money . And maybe aggravation too !
Health Savings Accounts were by law set-up to be paired with a specific type of high deductible health insurance plan . So , one must accompany the other . Each year the IRS announces the guidelines for what the range of acceptable deductible levels are for HSA qualified health insurance plans and the maximum amounts people can contribute to their Health Savings Account . Qualified high deductible health insurance plans for 2014 can have a deductible starting at $ 1250 for individual coverage and $ 2500 for family coverage . The maximum out-of-pocket exposure under these plans can be no more than $ 6350 for an individual and $ 12,700 for a family . The maximum an individual under the age of 55 can contribute to a Health Savings Account in this year is $ 3300 for an individual and $ 6550 for a family . Persons 55 + can contribute an additional $ 1000 to their HSA account . The amounts that persons contribute to their Health Savings Account is 100 % deductible from their gross income and can accumulate tax free and as long as withdrawals from the HSA are for covered medical expenses there are no tax consequences for the use of these funds . HSA funds can be accessed for non-eligible expenses but such withdrawals are subject to a tax penalty .
Health Insurance Premiums generally can not be paid for with funds from a HSA . The situations where Health Insurance premiums can be paid by a qualified distributions from a HSA is when an individual is over age 65 and paying for Medicare , when an individual is being covered by COBRA health care continuation coverage , and health care coverage while an individual is recieving unemployment compensation . That being said , one should try to avoid using their HSA for such purposes unless absolutely necessary . Your HSA is earning compound interest on the funds in your account , and at age 65 you will be able to start recieving distributions from the account in almost the exact manner as if it were an IRA . Given the benefits of having a duel health care expense/retirement fund that has a `` healthy '' ballance , one should try to minimize unnecessary distributions .
Health Insurance Premiums generally can not be paid for with funds from a HSA . The situations where Health Insurance premiums can be paid by a qualified distributions from a HSA is when an individual is over age 65 and paying for Medicare , when an individual is being covered by COBRA health care continuation coverage , and health care coverage while an individual is receiving unemployment compensation . That being said , one should try to avoid using their HSA for such purposes unless absolutely necessary . Your HSA is earning compound interest on the funds in your account , and at age 65 you will be able to start receiving distributions from the account in almost the exact manner as if it were an IRA . Given the benefits of having a duel health care expense/retirement fund that has a `` healthy '' balance , one should try to minimize unnecessary distributions .
A tough question to answer because it is so subjective , what 's high to one person may quite acceptable to another . As 30 year insurance industry professional I would say that by the standards of 2014 , you are entering `` high deductible '' territory when your plan 's annual deductible exceeds $ 2000 for an individual . When many consumers hear the term high deductible it is often being used as another way of saying this is a health insurance plan designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . The model for this product being that the lower premiums for a high deductible health insurance plan with no copayment features will free up money to fund an HSA and hopefullyaccumulate a health care nest egg for a person 's retirement years . In 2014 the minimum deductible for an HSA based plan is $ 1250 and the maximum deductible is $ 6350 . With the advent of the Affordable Care Act 's -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- health insurance marketplaces in 2014 the consumer is now presented with a whole new array of health insurance plan designs that will certainly meet anyone 's definition of a high deductible plan but that may not be designed to be compatible with an HSA . Extra care and caution needs to be exercised by the consumer in the new world of health insurance and I would recommend seeking out the services of an experienced health insurance brokers in your marketplace to help you find the plan best suited to your needs and budget .
We insurance people like to use all sorts of acronyms , it keeps us mysterious and sexy . CDHP is the abbreviation for Consumer Directed Health Plan . This is a bit of a fuzzy designation but it is generally used in reference to a high deductible health insurance policy meant to be tied to a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA - see more mysterious letters -RRB- . An example would be a health insurance policy with a deductible of $ 6350 for an individual followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that -LRB- this is the maximum allowable in 2014 -RRB- . This plan would have no office visit , emergency room or prescription copayments with all covered services subject to the $ 6350 deductible . The premium for such a plan design should be meaningfully less than that of a lower deductible plan with copayments . The high deductible health plan policyholder is supposed to take their premium savings and set them aside in a Health Savings Account from which they pay for their routine expenses such as office visits and prescriptions . The amounts a person sets aside in an HSA reduce their net taxable income which reduces their taxes thus saving them not only premium dollars but tax dollars . Unused funds in the HSA can rollover from year-to-year and accumulate on a tax deferred basis over time to build up a financial nest egg that can be tapped into in a person 's Medicare eligibility years to pay for future medical expenses .
Health Insurance Premiums can only be paid for with funds from a Health Savings Account under certain circumstances . The situations where Health Insurance premiums can be paid by a qualified distributions from a HSA is when an individual is over age 65 and paying for Medicare , when an individual is being covered by COBRA health care continuation coverage , and health care coverage while an individual is recieving unemployment compensation . That being said , one should try to avoid using their HSA for such purposes unless absolutely necessary . Your HSA is earning compound interest on the funds in your account , and at age 65 you will be able to start recieving distributions from the account in almost the exact manner as if it were an IRA . Given the benefits of having a duel health care expense/retirement fund that has a `` healthy '' ballance , one should try to minimize unnecessary distributions .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
An HSA account can be used to pay long term care insurance premiums . A retirement health savings account -LRB- HSA -RRB- plan is an account developed for pre tax or tax deductible contributions for medical expenses . It generally is attached to a high deductible medical plan . Some employer sponsored medical plans that include an HSA account also make contribution to their employee 's HSA account as an additional benefit .
A person on Medicare can have an HSA -LRB- health savings account -RRB- but they can no longer contribute to an HSA once they go on Medicare . The funds that are still in the HSA at the time of enrolling in Medicare can be used to pay for expenses that are not covered by Medicare , such as co-pays , deductibles , premiums , etc. .
With more than 34 years of experience in the HSA/Health insurance business , I 'm happy to offer my expert and unbiased answer . Although the average deductible has substantially increased over the last 30 years , the popularity of the HSA concept is here ... and here to stay . High Deductible Health Insurance plans -LRB- HSA -RRB- are very popular for individuals and families that want quality medical coverage from reputable companies , but at a rate they can afford . Even with the passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka Obamacare -RRB- , the popularity of HSA accounts has increased . But what about the future of these types of plans ? Their popularity is not likely to decrease , since health insurance costs keep increasing , and there is no other type of coverage that can offer a combination of network-negotiated discounts and paying for healthcare , dental , and vision expenses with tax-free dollars . However , as our political landscape changes , be prepared for unanticipated changes ! As we move closer to 2017 and 2018 , many legislative changes are planned . These changes could impact the cost of coverage and the amount of federal subsidy that is received . Both the group sector and individual sector could be adversely affected . So ... Expect HSAs to continue to be a popular and `` normal '' choice to consider for individuals , families , and small and large businesses . Answer provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's premier healthcare authorities . Edward is the owner of majormedicalhealth.com , where consumers can compare the best health insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Yes and No . If you are under age 65 and have a Health Savings Account that you are funding you can not use funds from your HSA account to pay for the premiums of the high deductible health insurance policy you have paired up with your HSA.The exceptions to this rule are if you become unemployed and need to access the funds to pay for your individual health insurance policy or for COBRA continuation coverage . If you are age 65 + then you are allowed to use funds from your HSA to pay for health insurance such as Medicare supplement policies .
The best way to get deductions on your taxes using health insurance is to purchase a HIGH Deductible Health Plan -LRB- HDHP -RRB- and open a health savings account -LRB- HSA -RRB- with it . The money you put in the HSA over the coarse of the year is tax deductible with the following limits : $ 3300 - Individual 2014 $ 3300 + $ 1000 - Individual 2014 -LRB- 55 + Contribution -RRB- $ 6550 - Family 2014 $ 6550 + $ 1000 - Family 2014 -LRB- 55 + Contribution -RRB- To learn more about HSA coverage visit CLM Insurance Group
Yes , HSA can pay for the premiums of tax qualified Long Term Care Insurance . A Health Savings Account , even if part of an an employer sponsored cafeteria plan , is allowed to pay for medically qualified expenses , and Long Term Care premiums count as that . There are limits set by the IRS on how much can be paid by the HSA for LTC premiums , based on age .
Yes and no . One can only establish a HSA if they are enrolled in a qualifying High Deductible Health Plan . However one may establish a HSA and can maintain it for the rest of their lives , collecting compound interest and using it to pay for qualified medical expenses -LRB- before age 65 -RRB- after the age 65 a HSA account is treated exactly like a IRA .
If you want the least exposure at the lowest premium then I recommend looking at an HSA qualified plan . The deductible is higher but if you are healthy you will save more on premium than the one or two doctor visits per year . An HSA qualified health plan will provide the most protection if you do have to go to the hospital or your health turns bad , at the lowest premium . A good independent agent dealing with health insurance can help you find a plan that fits your budget .
A VEBA stands for Volunteer Employee 's Benefit Association and is a not a retirement income plan . It is a health benefit plan that pays medical costs , dental , eye care and health insurance related premiums much like an HSA account . And like an HSA account , a VEBA is generally tied to a high deductible health plan .
Deducting your healthcare premiums is not only possible , but makes financial sense . I 'll use myself as an example . I have been an insurance broker for 33 years so there may not be a better resource . I own an HSA -LRB- along with the High-Deductible-Health-Plan -RRB- and have been a supporter of this type of policy for many years . Although I may file my taxes differently than yourself , I am able to deduct a portion of the premiums along with the proceeds that are deposited into the HSA . A self-employed person can deduct health insurance on their taxes in a number of ways . However , whether you use Turbo-Tax or simply complete your own tax return without help , it s always wise to consult a tax expert or the IRS website regarding deductibility of health insurance . And remember that premiums and actual expenses may be treated differently as well persons that itemize vs. not itemizing .
Yes , HSA can be used to pay for tax qualified Long Term Care Insurance premiums , even if the Health Savings Account is offered through an employer provided cafeteria plan . LTC premiums are considered a qualified medical expense and as such , can be paid by an HSA up to a certain limit .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Is Life Insurance For A 40 Year Old ?
The price of life insurance for a 40 year old depends on the health , tobacco use , weight , and gender of the applicant , in addition to how much life insurance is purchased and what type of policy is bought . Short term policies cost much less than permanent policies . Policies for smokers usually cost at least double the rate of policies for nonsmokers . Coverage for those with serious health conditions can cost 10 times or more of the premium for a 40 year old with perfect health . To get an estimate of a life insurance quote for a 40 year old with your characteristics , you can run a quote on an website advertising `` instant life insurance quotes '' . You can input different amounts and different types of policies to see how rates differ for different scenarios .
Life insurance rates for smokers may be less expensive than you realize ! Of course , as experienced brokers , our job is to shop , compare and find the lowest prices with the help of our top-rated websites and modern software . Nicotine use is one of the underwriting factors considered when determining rates . However , other factors , such as use of medications , existing conditions and height/weight will also factor in the determination of prices . A few general estimates from top-rated companies : -LRB- Rates are monthly for a healthy smoker...10-year guarantee -RRB- : $ 39 - $ 250,000 40 year old male $ 19 - $ 100,000 40 year old male $ 33 - $ 250,000 40 year old female $ 60 - $ 500,000 40 year old female $ 29 - $ 250,000 30 year old male ALSO ... $ 109.86 - $ 500,000 40 year old male 20-year guarantee
The price of life insurance for a 40 year old depends on the health , tobacco use , weight , and gender of the applicant , in addition to how much life insurance is purchased and what type of policy is bought . Short term policies cost much less than permanent policies . Policies for smokers usually cost at least double the rate of policies for nonsmokers . Coverage for those with serious health conditions can cost 10 times or more of the premium for a 40 year old with perfect health . To get an estimate of a life insurance quote for a 40 year old with your characteristics , you can run a quote on an website advertising `` instant life insurance quotes '' . You can input different amounts and different types of policies to see how rates differ for different scenarios .
The reason that life insurance premiums go up with age is because mortality rates go up the longer someone lives . When someone buys a 10 year term life insurance policy at age 20 , the rates will not be much higher than at age 30 , because the death rate for 30-40 year old persons does not vary much . However , the rates for a 10 year term policy will be much higher for a 60 year old person than a 50 year old person , because mortality rates go up a lot between ages 60-70 , especially for men .
All 25 year olds are not equal . Life insurance death benefits replace income that dies when the insured dies . If a 25 year old -LRB- or any age -RRB- has other people that would be hurt financially at his or her death , then life insurance might be a smart solution . Granted , a 25 year old single person may not have as much `` need '' for life insurance as a 40 year old with 3 school age kids , but may still want life insurance to replace a financial loss .
The best life insurance plans are different for different people , because no two people have exactly the same financial scenario or personal details . One 40 year old male may own a home , be raising three teenagers soon to go to college , and have no health problems . He is certainly going to want a large policy to cover his family if he should pass away , and to be able to afford that much , he is probably going to want to take it in term insurance . Another 40 year old male may have finished treatments for stage 4 colon cancer a year ago . The policy he gets it going to be much smaller , will probably be whole life , and will be graded for at least two years . While the best plan for his family would be more like what the first man got , the best plan for him , in reality , will be one he can get . He can then replace it with one that has a larger face amount after his cancer has been in remission for a number of years . PS The ironic thing is , most people who can get the best plans for everyone , put it off until they can no longer get them .
In past years , health insurance was typically more expensive for women under 50 due to the cost of medical care compared to men of the same age . After 50 , rates were typically higher for men , who tend to begin incurring higher medical bills than women after age 50 . Since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act , the cost for coverage for people of the same age can no longer be based upon their sex , meaning the cost of coverage for a 40 year old man would be the same as the cost for a 40 year old female to purchase the same policy .
The premiums for Critical Illness Insurance depend on your age , gender , and smoking status . Rates in 2009 ranged from an average of $ 200 per year for a 40 year old nonsmoking male , for a lump sum benefit of $ 10,000 . At 50 years old , the average cost for that amount was $ 290 . Cost per thousand went down as the benefit went up , so that the average rate for $ 50,000 for that same man was only $ 730 at age 40 , rather than 5 times the $ 10,000 premium .
To see what life insurance costs for a 40 year old male or female , with different builds and health conditions , you should talk to an insurance professional who asks questions so he/she can quote you correctly . To get a general idea of what different face amount and policy terms would cost for a 40 year old , you can use a free , instant quote engine provided on some life insurance websites . However , that quote could be way off base when risk factors and health conditions are involved . It is always best to talk to someone in addition to getting your quote online .
That is an interesting question ! I want to make sure you understand what exactly you are asking , and what would happen , as it seems as if the agent you spoke with may have misunderstood you . You have 6 policies totaling $ 31k in face value . Without knowing how long you 've had them , let 's assume they are each at least a couple of years old . There are some things to be aware of here - taking reduced paid up coverage on 4 of them might seem like that would leave you with about $ 20k in coverage , but chances are it will actually be considerably less than that . How much coverage were you wanting to keep on yourself ? The second thing to be aware of is that you wo n't receive any money from taking the reduced coverage , only what you would have paid monthly on them . So again , understanding that I have no information on your policies to go on , let 's assume that they are all for $ 5k apiece and you pay $ 40 total a month in premiums . What you will gain from taking the reduced coverage is considerably less than $ 20k insurance for you , and $ 40 a month more money . Assuming that you are good with considerably less insurance coverage for yourself , and that your daughter 's policy can be purchased for less than that $ 40 a month , you are good to go . Since you are not surrendering any of the policies , there are no replacement issues to worry about , as you 're not replacing anything . There 's a whole lot more information that I would need to really steer you right , so maybe it would be wise on your part to contact someone other than whom you spoke with the first time , and get a better idea . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Auto insurance for an 18-year old can be fairly affordable or quite expensive . The rate depends on the type of vehicle that is being insured , the driving record of the person applying for coverage and where they live . And yes , males are more expensive to drive , which I always found to be quite ironic considering my sisters were the persons in an accident , not me ! Of course , that was 40 years ago . Re the rates of the 18-year old , perhaps as low as $ 50 per month or much much higher . Shopping the top-rated companies will help and that 's what experienced brokers like us will do .
Disability Income Insurance evaluates health factors , so the cost of the policy will depend on how the applicant is rated health wise . If a nonsmoker who is of normal weight and has no health history , Preferred ratings can be given . The price also depends on the risk of the occupation , how much income the applicant makes -LRB- and how much of that income they want to replace in case of disability -RRB- , and what bells and whistles they want on their policy . For a 40 year old male office worker who makes $ 60,000 per year , the price can be as good as $ 50 per month for a plan that will last to age 65 .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
Short term life insurance , such as 5 year Term or 10 year Term , can cost much less than life insurance locked in for longer periods of time , such as 30 year Term Life insurance or Universal Life . However , when that short term is complete , the price for that policy will jump extremely high . If the insured person 's health has gotten worse during that time , he/she may need to pay much higher premiums or possibly may not even qualify for a new life insurance policy . Therefore , it is important to look at the need involved , when purchasing a life insurance policy . If you are 40 years old and want it to cover your children going to college , getting a short term policy may suffice . If you want it to pay for your funeral , then it is better go with some type permanent plan .
A 2 million dollar life insurance policy will cost much different rates for men and women , young adults and seniors , smokers and nonsmokers , those with perfect health and those who have multiple health conditions . The price also varies greatly according to how long the premium is locked in . Here are some examples of the cost of a 2 million dollar life insurance policy for a 40 year old male who has perfect health . 10 year term - approx $ 50/mo 20 year term - approx $ 100/mo 30 year term - approx $ 200/mo Permanent - approx $ 800/mo You can go to a website that offers instant quotes to see what a $ 2,000,000 policy costs at other ages , genders , etc. .
How much does life insurance cost for a 24 year old ? Well with all types of insurance , provided you are a healthy individual , the price is pretty low . While Term is cheap at this age , so is permanent coverage and a young person should consider the real advantage of locking in their coverage while it is low cost and has the most time to work in their favor . I am so glad as a 53 year old who at 24 was a very atheletic , fit individual who contracted diabetes at 40 and had a bout with A FIB -LRB- heart problem -RRB- at 53 that I locked up my life insurance in my 20 's , when my good health allowed me to purchase it for cheap money . My rates are locked in , I own the policy , they ca n't take it away , they ca n't make me requalify , the policy does n't `` end '' before I do . This is n't even taking intoaccount all the other benefits a permanent policy provides , but the factit 's `` mine '' I `` own '' it , I do n't rent it .
The cost of a $ 50,000 critical illness policy averages approx $ 50/mo for 40 year old person in the Midwestern US . That same policy averages a premium of about $ 150/mo for a person aged 60 , and only about $ 20/mo for a 20 year old . You are able to purchase more than $ 50,000 in the middle aged years .
Yes in many ways . The most common method for using life insurance as an investment is through Indexed Universal Life policies . 1 . You are looking for an alternative to CD or Money Market accounts with historically low rates of return . 2 . You want better growth than those accounts , let ` s say 4-6 % on average net of any fees . 3 . You want that growth to be on tax-deferred basis . 4 . You want our money to be totally safe from market losses . For example , if you purchase a mutual fund at $ 100,000 , and it grows 10 % in the first year , your account would reach approximately $ 110,000 . However , if the following year nets you a 40 % loss , your account would only be at $ 66,000 . If your third year produced a 10 % rate of return , youd still be below your original investment at $ 72,600 minus fees and expenses . However , in an Indexed IUL the reset every year means you never earn less than zero . So , if you put $ 100,000 in a single premium Indexed IUL and receive 10 % growth your first year , your end result is $ 110,000 . Continuing the hypothetical scenario , say the markets drops 40 % in the second year . Youll lose nothing . After your second year , your account will still be at $ 110,000 . In the third year , your account grows 10 % , which means youll have $ 121,000 minus fees and expenses . So what you get is a potential for upside of the market with no downside risk . Generally the floor is 0 % and the cap is 15 % . That means that if the S&P index gains 10 % for a year your will get 10 % into your contract minus fees . If the index moves 20 % you will only get 15 % . This is the cap that means that you can not get credited more than that . But if the index loses 10 % you will not lose anything . Your contract will get 0 % for that year minus policy fees . In a properly structured policy fees are usually around 2 % . Historically , in properly structured IUL policies cash values grow on average 7-8 % annually . If you deduct around 2 % for policy fees you may net 5-6 % annually . Again , all of your money is liquid from day one , principle and interest . It grows tax-deferred and there is no market risk , but there is a chance for a market gain up to 13-15 % annually minus fees . Also , since it is a life insurance policy you will get other benefits . A fairly healthy 65 year old would get over $ 200,000 of tax free death benefit with a $ 100,000 single premium payment . Many of these policies have additional benefits like Terminal Illness rider and Chronic Illness rider included . These are called Living Benefits , which allow you to use a bigger portion of the death benefit when you get terminally or chronically sick .
There are far fewer companies that will offer term life insurance to a 70 year old person than to a 40 year old , but they do exist . Most often , at that age the policy is a universal life policy that is guaranteed not to lapse for x number of years at a guaranteed level premium . The rates are as low as term rates , and you have the option of dumping in more money to keep the policy in effect longer , which is an option you do not get with term insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Medicaid Take A Life Insurance Policy ?
Medicaid allows persons going through a Medicaid spend down to hold onto a certain number of assets -LRB- $ 2,000 for an individual , much higher for a couple . -RRB- $ 1,500 of life insurance cash value in one policy is allowed in addition to that $ 2,000 limit . Let 's assume you are a widowed female in a nursing facility and your private funds are dwindling , so you are getting ready to go on Medicaid to pay your living and health care expenses . You have a life insurance policy with $ 10,000 cash value . What will happen to it ? 1 -RRB- You are allowed a final expense policy , so you could possibly assign that over to a funeral home or put it in a irrevocable trust to be used for funeral expenses . This would most likely be a feasible choice if the face amount of the policy is $ 15,000 or under . 2 -RRB- If the face amount is much larger than the cash value , you might be allowed to take a loan against your policy to get the cash value under the allowed amount , then use the loan to pay for your nursing home costs . That way you can still preserve your policy , even though you will be paying interest on the loan . 3 -RRB- In this example , there is no spouse , but if there was , you could transfer the ownership of the policy to your spouse , as long as it was compliant with Medicaid rules . If you have a disabled child , the policy could be transferred to a trust for them . 4 -RRB- You could convert your life insurance policy to a Long Term Care Benefit Plan that will enable you to keep a portion of the death benefit while legally using the policy to pay for your long term care costs . 5 -RRB- You could liquidate the policy and spend the cash on purchasing an allowable funeral policy or on your medical care .
Typically , Medicaid can not take your life insurance policy . If you have a large cash value policy , such as whole life insurance or universal life insurance , the cash value is considered an asset and could keep you from qualifying for Medicaid , but they can not take your policy away . The policy you own is a contract between you and the life insurance company you purchased it from and no one can take that away from you . If you own a term life policy with no cash value , then Medicaid will not consider it an asset and it is irrelevant to your qualifying .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Medicaid does n't actually `` take '' your life insurance . You just ca n't qualify for Medicaid assistance if you have more countable assets than Medicaid allows . In most states $ 2,000 is the total allowed to qualify for Medicaid assistance . Checking and savings accounts , retirement money , cash value of life insurance , etc. all count against you when qualifying for Medicaid . Many people will cash surrender their life insurance to qualify for Medicaid . You can also irrevocably assign it to your funeral home and it will be exempt but must be all used for funeral expenses if you do that . An actual funeral preplan life insurance policy that you purchase from a funeral home is always exempt from Medicaid .
Medicare does not take life insurance from anyone . Medicare is a healthcare insurance program for those who have paid into it over the years -LRB- and some others -RRB- . Medicaid is an assistance program for those who have low income and low assets . If a person applying for Medicaid has term life insurance , it will not matter . If the Medicaid applicant has permanent life insurance with high cash value , there may be a need for the policy owner to take actions with the policy to enable them to be approved for Medicaid .
In the vast majority of situations the answer is no . Medicaid is a state-run insurance program designed to help low income persons pay for their health care . As a general rule you must not be able to afford to pay for private health insurance in order to qualify for Medicaid . However , this is a government program we 're talking about so there are always some exceptions buried in the fine print . This is where things can get complicated and the rules can vary from state to state in some situations . Some state Medicaid programs will assist in paying private insurance premiums for a person who can not fully pay them . A low income person who has recently lost their job and their health insurance through their former job may be eligible for assistance in paying their COBRA premiums in some states . You would have to check with your state 's Medicaid office to learn what the rules are in your particular state . Also , you have a limited amount of time to apply for such assistance after losing your job in states that provide this type of assistance so time is of the essence . Medicaid also has a special program for people diagnosed with AIDS that may qualify them for premium payment assistance . Once again , you will need to check with your state 's Medicaid office to determine what their policies and procedures are for qualifying for such assistance .
Medicaid allows persons going through a Medicaid spend down to hold onto a certain number of assets -LRB- $ 2,000 for an individual , much higher for a couple . -RRB- $ 1,500 of life insurance cash value in one policy is allowed in addition to that $ 2,000 limit . Let 's assume you are a widowed female in a nursing facility and your private funds are dwindling , so you are getting ready to go on Medicaid to pay your living and health care expenses . You have a life insurance policy with $ 10,000 cash value . What will happen to it ? 1 -RRB- You are allowed a final expense policy , so you could possibly assign that over to a funeral home or put it in a irrevocable trust to be used for funeral expenses . This would most likely be a feasible choice if the face amount of the policy is $ 15,000 or under . 2 -RRB- If the face amount is much larger than the cash value , you might be allowed to take a loan against your policy to get the cash value under the allowed amount , then use the loan to pay for your nursing home costs . That way you can still preserve your policy , even though you will be paying interest on the loan . 3 -RRB- In this example , there is no spouse , but if there was , you could transfer the ownership of the policy to your spouse , as long as it was compliant with Medicaid rules . If you have a disabled child , the policy could be transferred to a trust for them . 4 -RRB- You could convert your life insurance policy to a Long Term Care Benefit Plan that will enable you to keep a portion of the death benefit while legally using the policy to pay for your long term care costs . 5 -RRB- You could liquidate the policy and spend the cash on purchasing an allowable funeral policy or on your medical care .
Medicaid qualified annuities , or `` Medicaid friendly annuities '' , are annuities that can sometimes be used by couples when one person in the couple enters a nursing home . One spouse is able to keep half their assets and the home he/she lives in , the other spouse must spend down the other half on nursing home care before becoming eligible for Medicaid . Rather than spend down those funds , the spouse entering the nursing home transfers the money to the other spouse , who puts it in an irrevocable , immediate annuity that is set to pay the at-home spouse an income up to the number of years left in his/her life expectancy . Consult a knowledgeable elder law attorney in your state to see if this is allowed in your state , and to know all the pro 's and con 's before endeavoring to take out a Medicaid qualified annuity .
Medicaid share of cost is a special kind of Medicaid program used in only a few states . I am not aware of a Medicare share of cost . Medicaid share of cost is for those who have too much income or assets to qualify for Medicaid . They have a share of cost factor based on their income and medical bills . When your medical bills equals your share of cost during the month , Medicaid picks up the rest of your medical bills for the remainder of the month .
You can , but this is actually pretty rare . It is illegal for any agent to sell you a Medigap policy if they know you are on Medicaid . This is asked on every Medigap insurance application , so if answered truthfully , you would generally not be able to purchase a Medigap policy . Some Medicare beneficiaries purchase a Medigap policy , and then at some future point become eligible for Medicaid . Since Medicaid essentially provides the benefits provided by the Medigap policy , the Medicare/Medicaid beneficiary may suspend their Medigap policy for as long as they are on Medicaid . They technically still have Medigap , but in a suspended status .
Yes . You can transfer the ownership of your life insurance policy to someone else . One reason that people change ownership though is to try to keep it from counting as an asset when qualifying for Medicaid . In those cases , it only works if you transfer it 5-years or more before applying for Medicaid . You can transfer the ownership to a funeral home for a 1st day exemption from Medicaid but you do n't want to do that with a large policy because Medicaid will get any money that is not used for the funeral . You can also transfer the beneficiary from one person to another .
It can be depending on the situation . In most cases if the proceeds are left to a named beneficiary then there are no estate issues . But there are exceptions to this . For example ; If a person is receiving Medicaid assistance for Long Term Care the cash value of a life insurance policy or in some States , the face amount will create issues as far as qualifying for benefits . If there was an undisclosed life insurance policy owned by the Medicaid recipient then the life insurance proceeds can be attached as part of the estate during Medicaid Recovery . Another exception may include large estates . For the average person there is no problem however , unless you have to deal with the Medicaid issues . If you have a large estate or your health is deteriorating and some type of long term care is imminent then seek out an elder law attorney or care resource planner for advice .
No , Medicaid will not take your life insurance . You can have as much Term life insurance as you want , and you can have a final expense policy that will fund your funeral and burial needs . You can also have Whole Life insurance , but if the cash value of your life insurance goes above a certain amount , you may need to adjust your policy when going on Medicaid . Talk to your Health and Human Services Dept to discuss their guidelines and your options if you have a Whole Life insurance policy .
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second.If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second . If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
No . If you have full Medicaid assistance you no longer need a Medigap Supplement policy . Everything that is not covered by Medicare will be covered by Medicaid . However you should make sure you are on full Medicaid . There are some people who get Medicaid assistance that pays their Medicare Part B Premium and RX assistance but does not pay their Medicare co-pays or deductibles .
Whole Life or Universal Life Insurance that has a cash value can be considered an asset for Medicaid purposes . You are allowed a final expense policy when going through a Medicaid spend down , so the policy might be able to be designated for that . You have a legal right to convert your Life Insurance into a Long Term Care Benefit Plan , allowing you to keep a reduced face amount and using the cash value to pay for Long Term Care needs . To find out the best way to handle your life insurance policy , be sure to know the Medicaid guidelines for your state and contact a knowledgeable agent to assist you .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
No , Medicaid can not take your Life Insurance policy . Your policy is your own contract with the Life Insurance company . It is protected from creditors and even lump sum and tax free upon distribution to the beneficiary . Medicaid is a government program that pays medical bills for qualified income applicants and has none to do with Life Insurance .
If you have Term life insurance , there is no cash value in it to count as an asset in a Medicaid spend down . If you have Whole or Universal life insurance with a large amount of cash value , it may or may not exceed cash value limits of policies that you can keep while entering a nursing home with Medicaid funds . Your social worker will tell you . If your policy does have high cash value , there is a law that allows you to retain some of the death benefit and use your cash to pay for your nursing home care . Or , you can transfer ownership of your policy to someone else , if it will be at least 5 years before you need to use long term care , and if you do not have the resources to pay for it in other ways . The nursing home will not take your life insurance policy . It will be evaluated along with all your assets , if Medicaid is needed .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is High Cholesterol Considered Heart Trouble When Completing A Life Insurance Application ?
On that family history question , when they ask if there was heart trouble prior to age 60 , they are asking about more serious issues such as coronary bypass , stent -LRB- s -RRB- , defibrillator , pacemaker , etc. . Having a parent or close relative who is taking blood pressure medication or cholesterol medication prior to age 60 should not affect you preferred eligibility .
For purposes of your life insurance application 's question about family history of heart disease , high cholesterol is not considered . While high cholesterol could lead to heart disease , many people are treated for it but never develop any cardiac problems . I commend you for being so conscious of giving truthful and complete answers to the questions on the application .
That is a great question ! I 'm glad that you asked it , because I believe that you are representative of a lot of people that fear health issues will keep them from getting life insurance , like pre-existing conditions did with health insurance . Many people are n't aware that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- removed that obstacle , so the perception that having a health issue gets in the way of getting , or affording insurance . Life insurance qualifications take a close look at your health issues , but are n't as strict as you might think . Most insurers will look at your high blood pressure , cholesterol levels , or diabetes , and if they are being controlled by medications , will not count that against you . It 's when these issues are n't being managed that you will have trouble getting or affording the coverage . Many companies will also have a `` look back '' period , where it is only within that period -LRB- usually 2-5 years -RRB- that major health issues are considered . So if you 'd had say , a stroke , but it was 10 years ago , and you 've been on medications and have had great health since , a good independent agent can help you find a policy that wo n't count that stroke against you . I am pleased that you were so careful with being truthful with your answers , that says a lot about your character and honesty . You rock !! I hope that helps you feel better about the question - they are looking for big things , not the little ones , but if you are still worried , just ask your agent , or drop me a line , and if I can help I will . Thanks for asking !
The quick answer to your question is you are correct , high cholesterol among family members is not used against you when underwriting life insurance . The questions asked about family history are to give the underwriter an idea about your family genetics . Since DNA testing is currently not allowed in life underwriting , questions about family history attempt to take the place of genetic testing when assessing possible health risks .
High Cholesterol is a risk factor , but not heart disease or `` heart trouble '' . Regarding your specific question relating to family health history primarily they are looking for genetic pre-disposition for certain conditions that you may be likely to develop . For example if both your parents were diabetic it increases the likelihood of you developing diabetes . But high cholesterol is more diet related and not so much genetic related .
The main rule of thumb when answering any questions on a life insurance application is to be 100 % truthful . After all we do live in the information age and most of the time the underwriter is checking your answers against data bases . Having said that , you don not have the need to over answer the questions either . The family history questions are very specific to the conditions underwriting would like to know . Therefore , if the question is concerning heart trouble and not specifically cholesterol you are being 100 % truthful . However , just from my experience when high cholesterol does run in the genes , you may test high during your paramed exam blood work . Most carriers will rate you higher if your cholesterol ratio is a bit out of balance or your LDL readings are over 250 . If the high cholesterol is not genetic , then your family history should not be a factor in raising your premiums . Good luck !
Family history of high cholesterol is not the same as heart trouble for purposes of your life insurance application . Your cholesterol history is relevant though and will be picked up on screening blood tests , if the policy you are applying for requires it . You do n't mention the details of what life insurance product you are considering . There are so many options available that it is very confusing for consumers shopping on their own . If you are not already , please seek advice from one or more local agents to your location . It cost you nothing to seek the advice of an insurance professional and it gives you added confidence in your insurance purchases .
No . Cholesterol is not consider heart disease when applying for life insurance coverage . This measurement is considered however , when applying for coverage . A high number may increase the cost of coverage while someone that is taking medication to control this issue may find that a lower cost . As in other cases , you are best to consider speaking to an independent agent that can advise the best course of action .
No , cholesterol is not considered as heart disease on your life insurance application . In fact some insurance companies have lossened up a bit and are allowing preferred rates with cholestrol above 300 as long as the total cholestrol ratio is -LRB- total/HDL -RRB- 4.5 . If you control your cholesterol you can Be approved for the best rate classes .
If your family member is just being treated for high cholesterol , then the answer would be no . Family medical history in life insurance underwriting generally focuses on whether a parent or a sibling of the proposed insured has developed heart disease or cancer prior to the age of 60 . Heart disease refers to items such as coronary artery disease , the placement of stents , bypass surgery , pacemaker , heart valve transplant , and other heart conditions . High cholesterol would not require a yes response . When looking for coverage , it 's important to compare multiple carriers for the coverage . Your full medical history will determine the risk classification you can qualify for - the risk class determines what the rates will be for coverage . In addition , every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines , meaning that each carrier can assign a different risk class to the same medical profile - one carrier may consider standard where another one may consider preferred . Your height/weight profile , prescriptions you 're taking , current conditions under treatment , conditions treated in the last 10 + years , any tobacco usage , and other factors affect the risk classifications carriers will consider . Determining the availability for preferred rates for your program would be best discussed with an independent insurance agent who can review your medical history , evaluate the risk class considerations , and compare a variety of options for you to make sure you 're securing the coverage at the lowest possible cost . Depending on how old the existing policy is , whether it 's term or permanent insurance , and what the premium is on it , you may want to consider securing a new policy that totals what the coverage would be if kept separately . Especially if it 's term insurance , a new policy would allow you to secure a new term rate guarantee where as the existing policy has fewer years remaining . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The main rule of thumb when answering any questions on a life insurance application is to be 100 % truthful . After all we do live in the information age and most of the time the underwriter is checking your answers against data bases . Having said that , you don not have the need to over answer the questions either . The family history questions are very specific to the conditions underwriting would like to know . Therefore , if the question is concerning heart trouble and not specifically cholesterol you are being 100 % truthful . However , just from my experience when high cholesterol does run in the genes , you may test high during your paramed exam blood work . Most carriers will rate you higher if your cholesterol ratio is a bit out of balance or your LDL readings are over 250 . If the high cholesterol is not genetic , then your family history should not be a factor in raising your premiums . Good luck !
High Cholesterol is a risk factor , but not heart disease or `` heart trouble '' . Regarding your specific question relating to family health history primarily they are looking for genetic pre-disposition for certain conditions that you may be likely to develop . For example if both your parents were diabetic it increases the likelihood of you developing diabetes . But high cholesterol is more diet related and not so much genetic related .
For purposes of your life insurance application 's question about family history of heart disease , high cholesterol is not considered . While high cholesterol could lead to heart disease , many people are treated for it but never develop any cardiac problems . I commend you for being so conscious of giving truthful and complete answers to the questions on the application .
Family history of high cholesterol is not the same as heart trouble for purposes of your life insurance application . Your cholesterol history is relevant though and will be picked up on screening blood tests , if the policy you are applying for requires it . You do n't mention the details of what life insurance product you are considering . There are so many options available that it is very confusing for consumers shopping on their own . If you are not already , please seek advice from one or more local agents to your location . It cost you nothing to seek the advice of an insurance professional and it gives you added confidence in your insurance purchases .
If your family member is just being treated for high cholesterol , then the answer would be no . Family medical history in life insurance underwriting generally focuses on whether a parent or a sibling of the proposed insured has developed heart disease or cancer prior to the age of 60 . Heart disease refers to items such as coronary artery disease , the placement of stents , bypass surgery , pacemaker , heart valve transplant , and other heart conditions . High cholesterol would not require a yes response . When looking for coverage , it 's important to compare multiple carriers for the coverage . Your full medical history will determine the risk classification you can qualify for - the risk class determines what the rates will be for coverage . In addition , every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines , meaning that each carrier can assign a different risk class to the same medical profile - one carrier may consider standard where another one may consider preferred . Your height/weight profile , prescriptions you 're taking , current conditions under treatment , conditions treated in the last 10 + years , any tobacco usage , and other factors affect the risk classifications carriers will consider . Determining the availability for preferred rates for your program would be best discussed with an independent insurance agent who can review your medical history , evaluate the risk class considerations , and compare a variety of options for you to make sure you 're securing the coverage at the lowest possible cost . Depending on how old the existing policy is , whether it 's term or permanent insurance , and what the premium is on it , you may want to consider securing a new policy that totals what the coverage would be if kept separately . Especially if it 's term insurance , a new policy would allow you to secure a new term rate guarantee where as the existing policy has fewer years remaining . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
High Cholesterol effects your efforts in purchasing life insurance by moving you away from the best possible class you could obtain , and if your level is high enough , a possible decline of coverage . High Cholesterol has been linked to heart problems and other ailments . Elevated cholesterol levels could lead to a heart attack and an early death . Something an underwriter accounts for .
On that family history question , when they ask if there was heart trouble prior to age 60 , they are asking about more serious issues such as coronary bypass , stent -LRB- s -RRB- , defibrillator , pacemaker , etc. . Having a parent or close relative who is taking blood pressure medication or cholesterol medication prior to age 60 should not affect you preferred eligibility .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . The company will look at your personal medical history , smoker status , height/weight profile , results of the medical exam -LRB- if applying for a policy requiring it - no exam policies typically cost more -RRB- , your family medical history -LRB- e.g. cancer or heart disease before age 60 in the immediate family -RRB- , motor vehicle record , and any hazardous activities you may participate in -LRB- such as aviation , scuba diving , drag racing , etc -RRB- . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
High cholesterol can affect life insurance rates , or even cause the policy to be postponed until the applicant finds a way to get his/her cholesterol under control for at least 6 months . There is a limit on how high your total cholesterol can be , but there is also a limit on high the ratio of your total cholesterol can be to your HDL -LRB- `` good '' cholesterol -RRB- . If your HDL number is high , some companies will allow your LDL -LRB- `` bad '' cholesterol -RRB- number to be a little higher , because the HDL offsets it in your cholesterol ratio .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Mobile Phones ?
Mobile phones are covered under your personal property coverage under your homeowners policies . However they are only insured against the covered perils listed in the policy , and are still subject to your policy deductible -LRB- typically $ 500 or $ 1000 minimum -RRB- , so a claim for just your cell phone is usually not feasible . Furthermore , accidental damage & handling is n't a covered peril under your homeowners policy , along with simply misplacing the item and not knowing what happened to it .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
Your home insurance policy will provide coverage for your mobile phone under the contents limit of the policy , but : 1 -RRB- the loss or damage to the phone must be the result of a covered peril -LRB- cause -RRB- . The phone is destroyed in a house fire - covered . Your 6-month old German Shepherd chews it to bits - not covered . 2 -RRB- the damage will be subject to your contents deductible , which is typically $ 500 or more . So , even if the phone is technically covered by the home insurance , the benefit you receive from that insurance will likely be little or nothing .
Your home insurance would probably cover your mobile phone but it would be subject to your deductible -LRB- the portion YOU are responsible for before your policy kicks in -RRB- which would nORMALLY be HIGHER than the cost of a mobile phone . DO n't you have insurance on your phone from your service provider ? Cheaper way to go and less deductible .
Good question . mobile phones are consider personal property . So if it get stolen you can claim it under your home insurance policy . Most mobile phones those days are less than your home dedutible so there will be no claim to pay out . Check with your current home policy for rules and exlusions .
Mobile phones are covered under your personal property coverage under your homeowners policies . However they are only insured against the covered perils listed in the policy , and are still subject to your policy deductible -LRB- typically $ 500 or $ 1000 minimum -RRB- , so a claim for just your cell phone is usually not feasible . Furthermore , accidental damage & handling is n't a covered peril under your homeowners policy , along with simply misplacing the item and not knowing what happened to it .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
Because an Iphone is personal property , it will be covered by most homeowners policies . Unless it is specifically scheduled on a personal articles floater that is attached as a part of the homeowners policy it will be treated as all other personal property . By that I mean that the loss will be adjusted subject to the deductible . The claim must show that damage has occurred and that the damage was caused by one of the perils covered by the policy . The personal property is also subject to a reduced limit of coverage when it is away from the covered home . Few Iphones will be more valuable that the reduced limit and so should be covered . There are independent companies that provide specialized coverage for mobile phones and most service providers have arrangements to secure coverage .
A Mobile Home Insurance policy is similar to a Homeowners ' in that it provides some of the same kind of coverage . It is , however , specifically designed to meet the unique needs of a Mobile Home owner . Coverage on the structure itself can be determined in many cases by the purchase price , if it is fairly new , but there are specially designed toold available to estimate ther replacement value . Some considerations that may affect pricing that are different from a Homeowners ' policy are items such as how the Mobile Home is situated . For example , what kind of tie downs are used ? Is it on a permanent foundations ? Is it in an approved park facility ? Ask if there is additional coverage available for awnings , canapies , etc. .
It is pretty simple , actually . We always suggest to our clients that they call us first so that we can talk with them about the loss , advise them about their coverage and explain the process . We obtain any contact information and file the claim on their behalf . Of course , they always have the opportunity to contact the company directly and file the claim themselves , but if we are aware of the claim from the beginning , just in case they have questions or concerns down the line , we can be better prepared to help . As a further service , I have a `` QR '' code that enables my clients to can our mobile app into their smart phones . In addition to free , 24/7 direct contact with us , among other services , it provides a direct link to our Professional Claims Support Staff .
If you are not financing the mobile home or the local homeowners association or mobile home park do n't require it , nope , you do n't need it . But if you do n't want to pay out of pocket for damage or destruction to your home and your personal belongings , do n't want to haved to pay for you own defense when someone sues you for accidental injury , then yes , you do need it . So it becomes a question of what do you want .
Medicare does cover Home Health Care , BUT only if : its ordered by a Medicare approved physician AND the person in incapable of leaving the home AND services are rendered by a Medicare approved provider AND the person requires more than just assistance with activities of daily living -LRB- eating , bathing , dressing , toileting , functional mobility -RRB- . Medicare will not pay for services performed by immediate relatives or members of a patients household . Medicare does not pay for Assisted Living or Adult Day Care . If these conditions are met , Medicare will generally cover medical services in the home as ordered by a Medicare approved physician .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
Homeowners insurance for a mobile is not much different than regular homeowners insurance . Some of the information that is required to be able to secure coverage will be a different though . Mobile home homeowners coverage is not something that every carrier does . To find out more about coverage and pricing in your are please contact a local agent for a free quote .
Manufactured home insurance is homeowners insurance that will insure a manufactured home . A manufactured home could be a mobile home or a factory home kit that is assembled on site . This would be different then a frame or traditional home that is built from scratch on site . Other then the term the coverage 's are relatively the same . Insurance providers generally have a policy that is specifically designed for manufactured homes .
Medicare Part B does offer coverage for motorized mobility devices -LRB- scooters -RRB- in certain situations . You must be evaluated by a doctor and your doctor must certify that you need a mobility device . The scooter must be used for movement primarily around your home and you must have a CMN -LRB- certificate of medical need -RRB- .
Medicare will pay for in home care if the home health agency providing it is Medicare approved , the patient receiving it is following a doctor 's care plan and receiving services such as PT or OT , and the person is home bound . In a nutshell , this means that it is very difficult or detrimental for the person to leave home due to their condition , and they need assistance of another person or mobility device to do so . Medicaid payment of home health services vary depending on each state . Under federal Medicaid rules , coverage of home health services must include part-time nursing , HCA services , and medical supplies and equipment .
Unfortunately , Geico does not carry Disability Insurance . Geico mainly carries property-casualty insurance , including home , condo , co-op , mobile home , flood , and renter 's insurance ; auto , commercial auto , collector car , motorcycle , ATV , boat , water craft , snowmobile , and umbrella insurance ; overseas and business insurance ; identity theft insurance ; and life insurance from an outside source .
Medicare covers many items needed for mobility . These include walkers , wheelchairs and even `` scooter '' . Your doctor must certify that you need a mobility assist device . You should obtain your wheelchair from a Medicare approved DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- supplier that accepts Medicare assignment . Doing so will minimize your out of pocket costs .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Laptops ?
Renter 's insurance can cover laptops , depending on your specific benefits and what riders -LRB- if needed -RRB- that you have . Wear and tear will not be covered . Also mechanical failure will not be covered either . Each carrier will have different rates and coverage so consult with an experienced full-time broker for the best rates .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
A laptop is covered as personal property under a renters -LRB- tenants -RRB- policy . Most insurers have a limitation for damaged electronic data equipment . There may be further restrictions if the laptop is a part of your business or belongs to your employer . The coverage also extends to your laptop when it is away from your residence ; however , there are limitations on coverage .
Great question ! Homeowners and renters policies will define the payout for your belongings in most cases as either `` replacement '' or `` actual cash '' value . There can be a big difference between the two , and as the insured , you 'd like `` replacement '' , and as the company , the `` actual cash '' . Here 's why : Let 's say you have a laptop that you bought a couple of years ago , and it 's seen better days , it does n't run quite as quickly as it did , and has a few dings and dents . When it comes time to replace it , replacing your computer with a new version of it is what you would get with `` replacement value '' . With `` actual cash value '' the company would take a look at the price for the new computer , and subtract off the depreciation cost for the length of time you had the old one . You might have to settle for a lesser laptop , or pay the difference in this case to receive the same laptop that the `` replacement '' version would have provided . This is a simplified explanation , but should give you a good understanding of the differences . If you would like more info , just hit the contact me button , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
It depends on your home policy , and what happened to the laptop . Your home policy protects your property against certain risks . If your laptop was stolen you may have coverage , but if you dropped it or spilled a drink on it that would not be covered on your home policy . In most cases though , your deductible is going to exceed the value of the laptop regardless of what caused the loss . Furthermore , you should try and protect your loss history . If your decuctible is $ 1,000 and it costs $ 1,200 to replace the laptop , your compensation will only be $ 200 . This may not be worth filing the claim as you may lose discounts for a clean loss history and the increased cost of insurance may not be worth it .
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Great question ! Most folks know the importance of homeowners insurance , but few people realize all of the benefits and coverage available with a renter 's insurance policy . Coverage options differ between insurance companies , but here is a quick list of items that are typically covered : 1 . It covers replacing all of your belongings , including furniture , clothes , shoes , tools , laptops , and TVs after a covered loss . -LRB- Many people incorrectly assume that if they are renting , their personal belongings are covered under the property owner 's insurance policy ; in most cases the renter 's belongings are not covered under the owner 's policy . -RRB- 2 . It covers medical costs for guests who may be injured in your home . -LRB- Perhaps the neighbor sprained their ankle falling off of your step ? Wouldnt it be nice to cover their medical expenses as a courtesy , and not have to pay out of your own pocket ? -RRB- 3 . It gives you liability protection for events you may be held liable for on or off the property . -LRB- Maybe the neighbor who sprained their ankle decides to sue you ? -RRB- 4 . It covers additional living expenses , such as a hotel room , and dining out in the event you are temporarily evacuated from your home . -LRB- Perhaps a pipe bursts , and the landlord says you have to stay somewhere else for 10 days while they conduct repairs ? -RRB-
The laptop would only be covered if the damage was due to a covered peril , such as fire , theft , vandalism or other named perils in your policy . If the laptop was damaged because you dropped it then it would not be covered . Check your policy or call your agent .
Renter 's insurance can cover laptops , depending on your specific benefits and what riders -LRB- if needed -RRB- that you have . Wear and tear will not be covered . Also mechanical failure will not be covered either . Each carrier will have different rates and coverage so consult with an experienced full-time broker for the best rates .
If the laptop is broken as the result of a covered peril the renters policy will pay to make it whole . The payment will be subject to the deductible and if the computer has depreciated very much your reimbursement might not be significant . If the computer is damaged by negligence or if it simply is running out of gas , then it probably wont be covered at all .
Like Edward has already answered , car break-ins are covered if you have the vehicle insured with Comprehensive -LRB- also called `` Other Than Collision '' coverage . Keep in mind thought , if anything is stolen - typically only those things permanently attached to the vehicle are covered under the auto policy . If a purse , laptop or other personal property not attached to the vehicle is stolen - most carriers cover these things under a homeowners or rental policy and are subject to that policies deductible and limits . So if your care gets broken into , you could be facing two claims and two deductibles unfortunately . Check with your local independent agent to verify your policy 's specific language .
depending on the policy form used , the electronics maybe covered in a home owners policy . In the HO-3 policy form the electronics are covered under the person property coverage section . It can be on an actual cash value basis or replacement cost . There is a separate coverage for electronics away from the premise , like computers , laptops , tablets and cellphones .
That is really going to depend on the `` accident '' and the verbiage within your renters policy . In most cases though your deductible on the policy will be more than the valuation of the repair to the laptop or the laptop itself . Read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that may be contained within or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
This question is very vague . Much would depend on the cause of the loss . If it is a covered cause of loss under the policy coverage , there would , likely , be limited coverage and it would be subject to the policy deductible unless the laptop is scheduled on an inland marine policy or has an inland marine endorsement added to the Homeowners policy . I hope your agent offers annual reviews of your policy . You should add this topic to the agenda .
Great question ! The answer depends upon a couple of things - your policies coverage , and where the laptop was when it was stolen . If it was taken from your apartment , then it generally will be . If it was in your car , parked in the apartment parking lot , there 's a good chance that you can get it replaced . If it was stolen at school , or you left it on a bus somewhere , that might be a whole lot harder to get back . I 'd advise you to contact your agent and tell them the story , and see what exactly your policy covers . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
I have to assume your laptop was probably stolen if you are wishing to file a claim with your homeowners insurance carrier . If this is the case your insurance company would have a claims phone number you can call to open a claim . A report will be taken and then coverage will be determined . Keep in mind your homeowners insurance policy will have a deductible that will need to be met before the insurance company will pay out .
Great question ! Anytime you take your personal belongings , and put them in someone else 's place of residence , it 's good to have protection for those belongings . In a dorm , maybe not , if the residency rules cover for theft or damage while living in the dorm . In a fraternity or sorority house , check the residency rules to determine if it is needed . In an apartment in a college town ? You bet . It 's relatively inexpensive , compared to the cost of replacing a good laptop , cell phone , or videogame system . -LRB- And especially tothe cost ofallthe above . -RRB- If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Without question , quote engines . They provide instant online quotes to consumers and of course , to brokers themselves . There is much more information in the quote engine software including online applications , product information , licensing information , and additional email capability . Certainly , a phone and laptop must be included along with some pretzels . I just ca n't work without pretzels .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Will I Have To Pay Taxes On Life Insurance ?
There are no taxes for owning a life insurance policy . If it increases in value , there are no reporting requirements . However , if you surrender the policy and the amount you receive exceeds the total of premiums paid , then you have taxable income . If you die , your beneficiaries will not have to pay income tax on the proceeds , however , the proceeds are includable in the estate/inheritance calculations which could generate a tax liability . There are other conditions where tax could be imposed but generally speaking life insurance proceeds escape taxation .
Most life insurance benefits do not necessitate paying income taxes . If you are the owner or beneficiary of a policy where the cash value is over the amount paid in , you may need to pay taxes on the gain . Federal estate taxes , and possibly state estate taxes -LRB- depending on where you live -RRB- may be charged on the portion of the estate value above the exempted amount , when there is not a surviving spouse . The federal exemption is 5.25 million dollars . The exceptions above represent a small percentage of life insurance policies . Life insurance is especially appealing because no tax is paid on most policies , ever .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy . The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is alegal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trustsreceive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy.The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
Paid up life-insurance means you dont make anymore payments on the policy . You still get the coverage , but you no longer have to pay for it . But heres the question : suppose you wanted to keep paying ? Why wouldnt the insurance company allow you to do so ? I mean , some of these permanent insurance policies can get very cash rich . Whole life policies can pay some pretty hefty dividends . Universal life policies can apply a pretty decent interest rate . As I am sure you have heard , there can be some great tax advantages to accumulating wealth inside life insurance : tax-deferred accumulation , and , under the right circumstances , tax-free distributions . So why wouldnt an insurance company just let you go for it ? A number of decades ago , they did . People were taking out policies with face amounts of $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 , but putting huge amounts of cash into them . Huge amounts . They really milked the tax advantages of the product . Of course , the IRS got wise to this and imposed certain rules . These rules limit the amount of money that can grow inside these policies and still avoid taxation . You can exceed this limit , but then you get a tax bill . From this point of view , paid up means if you put more cash into the policy , you could create a taxable event . It also means something else , in consideration of the expenses of the policy . Lets say you take out a universal life product with a guarantee to age 100 . This means that given the proper payment schedule , both the premium and the death benefit will be guaranteed to a age 100 . The emphasis is on the payment schedule . If you meet it , then no more payments would be required to secure those guarantees . It would be paid up . Whats interesting here is that , depending on the product , a lot of flexibility exists for designing a payment schedule . You can have continuous pay and simply pay the lowest amount required annually . You could have a single pay in which just one payment in the first year will get you what you want . You could have a 10 pay , which means you just pay for 10 years - and still get the guarantees . You could have 20 pay . And so on . Depending on your cash flow and other factors , you could pay up your policy with any number of strategies . And then you simply would not have to worry about paying for your life insurance , even though you would have the coverage for as long as you need . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
I am going to answer this question as someone who sells whole life and universal life only . I do not sell variable life insurance , which is typically considered an investment . First of all , I think the word `` investment '' does not really apply to life insurance , regardless of the type of product . This is because life insurance is first and foremost intended to provide a benefit to survivors . Any cash it develops is nice to have , but it is secondary . The first priority in buying life insurance should be getting the most attractive premium for the entire time you need coverage . Even with very aggressive underwriting , that cost can be higher than the costs associated with conventional investment products . Now , life insurance does have specific tax advantages . These include tax-deferred cash accumulation , and income-tax free benefits . You should speak with your tax advisor for more details . If the insured is young enough , and qualifies for a low enough rate , and is in a high-enough tax bracket , then the cost of his life insurance might be lower than the taxes he would pay on an investment outside life insurance . Here life insurance may be considered a smart `` investment . '' In most other cases , life insurance would not be a smart investment . But , with a strong product from a strong company , the guaranteed cash value in a whole life or universal life product could be significant . You could get more bang for your buck inside life insurance that you would from a standard conservative investment . For that reason , people do use life insurance as the guaranteed or conservative part of their financial portfolio .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
Excellent question . Before I try to tackle this , please realize I am not a tax advisor so this response should not be used as tax advice , always consult your tax professional . Typically , since the death benefits of life insurance are tax-free -LRB- although the amount of the death benefit could push one over the exclusion amount for estate taxes -RRB- the premiums paid for life insurance would not be tax-deductible . Typically , the IRS does n't like for us to be able to use tax-deductible dollars to fund something that is tax-free . Although , I 'm always on the lookout for a loop-hole that allows it ! :-RRB- I hope that helps , if you have something more specific please let me know .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How Do You Get Long Term Care Insurance ?
Basically there are three distribution channels that sell long term care insurance : company direct , career agencies and brokerage firms . Buying direct from the insurance company or a career agency limits the comparison between polices that a consumer needs to have to make an informed decision . Brokerage firms have multiple companies and are generally more neutral in their selection process . Many brokerage firms have online portals that display comparison spreadsheets between insurance companies .
If you live in Florida , and some other states , your agent must have a certain certification in order to sell long-term care insurance . When you are looking for an agent make sure they can provide the certification for you to review . Otherwise , you will be wasting your time . The reason I know this is , I live in Florida and I have my long-term care certification .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
If you do not have an estate to protect then you may not need Long Term Care . If you can qualify for Medicaid or a Medicaid waiver program then you do not need long term care . If you do not mind spending down all you have worked for during your life to go on Medicaid then you do not need long term care . If you have an estate you want to pass to your heirs , loved ones you want to protect from the burdens of caring for you when you become sick and can no longer care for yourself then you do need long term care insurance . If you want choices on where you are cared for then you need long term care .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
The two main advantages of Long Term Care Insurance are : 1 -RRB- Paying for your long term care needs without having to spend down your assets , and 2 -RRB- Having a say in the care that you get . As Care Plan Coordinator for a nursing home , I saw the advantages of Long Term Care Insurance up close . It can enable you to get a private room , get out into your home more quickly , and other perks that are not possible when on Medicaid . Not everyone can afford Long Term Care Insurance , and Medicaid is a blessing for those who need it . But there definitely are advantages to having Long Term Care Insurance .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How Much Does A Long Term Care Insurance Policy Cost ?
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Long Term Care and the cost associated with it is rising in the US . According to page 63 in the 2015 Medicare and You Book `` At least 70 % of people over 65 will need long-term care services and support at some point '' . It 's always important to consider factoring in those cost in your retirement planning . Cost vary from state to state , you can find a great resource that outlines these costs at WEBSITELINK No matter how you look at it Long Term Care Insurance is expensive and there is a lot of underwriting that goes with it . A viable option for a lot of families is to consider short term care insurance . Premiums are much lower and the underwriting process is much easier . Many application are approved in under a week . Short Term Care plans can pay for nursing home facility , assisted living facility , home health care , adult day care and hospice care . Feel free to contact us for more information .
Technically , no . Medicare was designed to help the elderly pay for acute sickness and accidents from whichone can heal relatively quickly . It does not cover chronic illness or prolonged rehabilitation from an accident . However , Medicare will provide payment of costs for some `` short-term '' recovery for the elderly that are enrolled in Medicare part A & B . There are prequalifications and limitations to what it will pay for , how much it will pay , the type of care it will pay for , and for how long -LRB- maximum of 100 days -RRB- . Payment for long-term care is usually paid out of pocket , or by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . To receive payment for care from the latter , one must be `` impoverished '' as defined by the state that they live in , and they usually must be in a facility -LRB- Medicaid/Medical only pay a few hundred dollars a month of home care -RRB- . The only other solution to the problem of paying for long-term care , either at home or in a facility , is long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- . This sector of the health insurance industry is in a bit of turmoil right now and if you have decided that you want to explore LTCi , make sure that you work with someone that is a specialist in this area . There are an infinite number of designs in coverage which can vary the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- by thousands of dollars a year . Also , be sure that you are working with agents that only work with the best LTCi companies in the industry , those that have strong financials , high ratings , and are committed to the field . The most important thing is to have a plan . Your plan may or may not include LTCi . But , if it does , buy no later than your mid-fifties as the price really starts to climb after that . Dont depend on Medicare for the payment of long-term care costs .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
The best time to buy long-term care insurance is anytime you are medically qualified to do so . The biggest problem people have is that they wait too long to apply , they get a condition or chronic health problem that is uninsurable by any carrier , and they are stuck with an LTC-friendly annuity as their only possible solution to how they might pay for long-term care costs . -LRB- This would be an annuity that does not require underwriting for the LTC benefit of the annuity contract , but allows for liberal access to the account value for payment of LTC costs . -RRB- Buying at a very young age does n't not have much of a financial advantage since premiums do n't really start to climb until about ages 50-60 . After age 65 , one has in reality `` missed the train '' and , assuming medical qualification , will pay a hefty price for a traditionally designed long-term care contract . However , there is another train behind the first one , and that involves designing the contract as a static pool of money with maximum access to it . It costs about half of thetraditionally designed LTCi contract , but it lacks any accommodation for the escalation of care costs over time . Still , it is better than no coverage at all . From an economic perspective , in buying young , one would have to weigh the cost of paying premium over a longer period of time . From an insurability perspective , however , one should remember that Superman -LRB- Christopher Reeve -RRB- did not know he would become a quadriplegic at age 41 . Also , many carriers have a `` preferred '' rate class , which may be a lot easier to get at an early application age . Recent claims history research has shown that a greater percentage of claimants are under age 65 and the number is growing . With some possible tax breaks on the payment of LTCi premiums - and possibly greater tax breaks in the future as Congress weighs the burden the uninsured elderly on Medicaid - one should seriously start planning for long-term care individually , as a couple , and for parents as early as possible . Death will happen . How long it takes to die may be problematic and costly .
Medicare Benefits can pay for a lot of thing like critical access hospitals , inpatient rehabilitation facilities and long-term care hospitals but when a person goes from needing rehabilitation services to long term care or custodial care , thats when they draw the line . Its estimated that at least 70 % of people over 65 will need long-term care support and services at some point . The cost of these services can dramatically drain your retirement nest egg but the cost of a lot of long term care policies can also be just as fighting . A simple cost effective option for most families is to look at a short term care plan . The cost is substantially lower than long term care policies , the underwriting process is much easier and most policy can be put in force in under a week . If you has more questions on this topic please contact us at The Insurance Advisor , We protect and enhance your Retirement , Health Care and Accumulated assets , allowing you to secure your legacy and enjoy your life stress free
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does USAA Renters Insurance Cover Jewelry ?
USAA renters insurance policies cover jewelry . However , like most renters coverage , there will be specific limits and exclusions regarding how much would be paid on a claim . With many policies , you can add riders to broaden your coverage or specifically schedule items of jewelry . Yourpersonalbroker or an experienced broker can review with you how to best cover any jewelry you have .
USAA renters insurance policies cover jewelry . However , like most renters coverage , there will be specific limits and exclusions regarding how much would be paid on a claim . With many policies , you can add riders to broaden your coverage or specifically schedule items of jewelry . Yourpersonalbroker or an experienced broker can review with you how to best cover any jewelry you have .
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
A standard renters insurance policy does cover jewelry loss or damage , if as a result of a covered peril . However , these policies contain a limit to the amount that will be paid for each jewelry item . The limits are generally $ 1,000 or $ 1,500 for each piece or a set amount for all jewelry lost or damaged at one time by one occurrence . So , obviously you could have jewelry that is worth a lot more than you would receive in the event of a covered loss . If such a situation exists for you , consider buying additional insurance based on the values of the jewelry . This can be done on an endorsement or separate policy . Check with your agent as to your options . Also , be aware that some pieces may need to be appraised before determining the premium you will be charged .
Yes , USAA does have life insurance . USAA offers life insurance in the products : Level Term , Military Term , Universal Life , Whole Life , and Combination , per the USAA website . You can compare USAA prices to others by first going to the USAA website to get their quotes , then input your information in a website that offers quotes from many different companies .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
To get USAA insurance , you must be a member of USAA . To be eligible to be a member of USAA , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from the US military . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , . 4 -RRB- You are a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses for named perils . Named perils usually include Fire , Theft , Lightning , Water -LRB- not Flood -RRB- and other acts of God . Unfortunately , losing an item is not a named peril . You would have coverage for jewelry if one of the named perils occurred but even then most policies have a limit for jewelry so check with your agent . A much better solution for jewelry is an Inland Marine or Jewelry policy . These are separate policieswith `` all risk '' coverageso anything that happens to the item it 's covered , even if you lose it .
Jewelry is covered under a homeowners policy . Most homeowners policies have an internal limit to the amount of coverage for jewelry . Under the homeowners policy the loss of jewelry is subject to the deductible on the policy . People are rarely satisfied with the adjustment made on jewelry under their homeowners policy . A jewelry floater is supplemental coverage that can be provided and it will replace the lost jewelry or pay a stated amount . This coverage must be backed up by an appraisal . There isnt usually a deductible on a jewelry floater .
The following people are eligible to apply for USAA Auto insurance : Active , retired and honorably separated officers and enlisted personnel of the U.S. military . Officer candidates in commissioning programs -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . Adult children whose eligible parents have or had a USAA auto or property insurance product . Widows and widowers of USAA members who have or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy . If you or your spouse served in the military , you will need to provide the following information for that person : Date of birth Social Security number USAA number Military enlistment , commissioning , retirement or separation date
Persons who are members of USAA are eligible for USAA life insurance . Here are some ways to be eligible -LRB- only one is necessary -RRB- : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from that service . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , or a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
That depends . USAA was formed to offer insurance products to members of the armed forces and their families . So , if you are or were a member of the US armed forces , you can get your insurance through a USAA agent . You may also be able to get your insurance through USAA if one of your parents was in the armed forces . They may require you to get their service number for verification . In my experience , USAA offers personal insurance like home and auto and they may have other lines as well as some other services like financing . I 've run into USAA policies from time to time and they seem to have pretty good products and pretty competitive rates . if you find a good agent that you can trust this could be a good option if you qualify .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
USAA does not offer their own Long Term Care Insurance coverage underwritten by USAA Life Insurance Company . However , through their website they offer long term care insurance from John Hancock Life Insurance Company . You can contact a USAA agent , call their home office , or visit their website for more information .
USAA is a very good and large insurer that operates as an auto insurer and as such may be higher or lower than a competitor . A few years ago my daughter moved from USAA to another independent agency company and was able to buy a renters policy , and auto policy and an umbrella all for less than her USAA auto policy . All auto insurance is regulated by individual states , so you can expect that an usurer can reflect its appetite for auto insurance in that state in its pricing . No company can be the least expensive in every state for every set of conditions . That is not a realistic expectation . You should be aware too that insurers often build elaborate rating algorithms which can produce several million price points across their business in a particular state . So your carrier may believe that a 16 year old with Corvette is not insurable to that carrier while another insurer might say the exposure is fine since they are exacting what they consider an adequate rate for the exposure .
USAA does indeed sell life insurance . USAA -LRB- United Services Automobile Association -RRB- is a Texas based insurance carrier founded in 1922 to serve the financial needs of past and present members of our armed forces . USAA life insurance plans can be very competitive in some situations . You should always compare rates to other carriers when shopping for life insurance . You should also factor in underwriting , which can significantly impact the final rate .
USAA Life Insurance has been a solid company since it started in 1922 . It is composed of members who are part of the military and their families . Moody 's rating service gave USAA its highest rating of Aaa in 2012 . USAA Life Insurance products come in several types and are good products . For those who can not get life insurance due to serving in an unsafe country or being in active service , USAA is there for them .
Your clothes and jewelry are covered under a renters policy . They are covered against loss from named perils . Most renters policies have a limit on recovery for jewelry . The key is the cause of the loss . Recovery on any loss is limited by the limits found in the declarations of the policy .
No , unfortunately , USAA does not offer disability insurance at this point in time . Their website does give good advice on what to look for when purchasing disability insurance . USAA offers a large line of insurance products that includes about every other type of insurance one could want , besides disability insurance .
Unfortunately , USAA does not have their own Disability Insurance policy for purchase . USAA does carry many other types of insurance policies . In order to purchase Disability Insurance , you can search on the internet for a Life Insurance company that offers a variety of Disability Insurance policies so that you can find the one with your best price and features .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What To Know When Filing A Homeowners Insurance Claim ?
When filing a homeowner 's insurance claim , you should have good documentation and records of how the claim originated , what damage has resulted and what future damage is at risk . An adjuster is likely to meet you at your home to view and discuss the damage and often , issue a check at that time .
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
Claim history is a big factor for insurance companies but just because you have a claim does n't mean your rate is going to increase . Several factors are used to determine a rate including the length of time you have been with an insurance company , credit , type of claim filed , amount of claim , castropheclaimsect . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover `` sudden and accidental '' losses . It is not a maintenance policy and you do not want to file small claims . Filing frequent , small claims will cause your rateto increase or your policy may be cancelled .
Homeowners insurance comes in different forms ; in most States , if you have a Form HO3 -LRB- Special Form -RRB- or a Form HO5 -LRB- Comprehensive Form -RRB- , Wind damage is covered to your dwelling , other structures and personal property . If you have incurred damage as a result of wind , it is important to protect the structure from further damage immediately and file a claim with your insurance carrier . If you are not sure whether to file a claim and need advice , you should contact your insurance agent and discuss the options , size of the claim and prior claims activity that you may have had within 5 years . The policy deductible will apply to the claim , in many States , you will have a separate Wind deductible which may be expressed in the form of a percentage of the coverage section being claimed against . For a homeowners insurance quote , you may click here : WEBSITELINK
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
When you need to file a Homeowners Insurance Claim , the best and quickest way to handle it is to call the CLAIMS Telephone number listed on your Homeowners Insurance declarations page . Most carriers have a 24 Hour reporting line for claims ; the station is staffed by an individual trained to take an initial report and pass it on to the assigned claims adjustor based on the type of claim and geographical location of the loss . Once the preliminary report is taken , a claims number is assigned , an adjustor is assigned and the preliminary record is report to the National Database also known as CLUE ; CLUE is a tool used industry wide to review prior claims activity on homes . The CLUE report will later be updated eventual showing the Closed Status and total amount paid by the insurance carrier to resolve the claim . When making the initial claim report , it is beneficial to only offer a simple and general explanation of the nature of the loss ; it is always better to give all the details directly to the claims adjustor as the initial claims report is usually not taken by a person licensed and trained with the capabilities of the insurance adjustor.In most cases , the insurance carrier will assign and adjustor who will make an initial contact within 1 business day . The adjustor will make an appointment to come out and review the damages claimed , a detailed estimate of the required repairs will be prepared and the adjustor willinterpret the policy to determine if and to what extent coverage applies to the damage incurred ; the final process will be a resolution letter mailed to the insured with a full accounting of the situation and perhaps an associated check for repairs . In some cases , an initial payment may be offered holding back thedepreciated portion of the loss until thedamages or items are replaced after which the carrier will reimburse the insured for the full replacement cost of the items as long as the policy coverseverything on a replacement cost basis . Any specificquestions regarding a loss should be directly discussed with the claims adjustorwho is licensed and responsible to handle the complete transaction and explain the processto the insured . Prior to any claim occurrence , it may alsobe a good idea to contact a licensed insurance representative to learn the process and best recommended method of handling thesituation should youencounter a claim .
A fence is normally covered under a homeowners policy . Please contact your agent before filing a claim as a fence claim may not exceed your deductible and if it does there might be premium adjustments that would make filing the claim questionable . There are claims that you should not file .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
Contacting your agent may not necessarily result in increased premium but reporting a claim might . Your agent is very unlikely to know how much your rates may increase if you were to file a claim . Keep this simple rule in mind : The less claims you file through insurance company the better . You are better off paying a small claim out of pocket . Let the insurance company handle your large claims . Even not at faults and comp claims will have some impact on your rates with most companies .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of reasons why your homeowner 's insurance company would ask for your sister 's renters policy . If your Sister filed a claim in conjunction with your Mom , your Mom 's company would want to assess what would be covered under the terms of that policy , and what they would be responsible for under theirs . They may also be trying to determine who is responsible for paying for the temporary housing costs , and for how long that coverage extends under each policy . They may also be trying to determine if some household items were listed under both policies , and filed as claims by both Mom and your sister . Neither wants to pay for something that the other will , if they do n't have to , you know ? It 's a pretty standard practice for insurance companies to communicate between themselves as much is as legally permitted , so that they can make the proper determinations on who is obligated to pay for what , and that payments are not duplicated . I would not worry too much about it . Thank you for asking , and I 'm glad that neither your Mom or Sister were hurt - that is more important than any of their things .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
The whole issue of filing a claim presents a problem . Property claims are actually rare . Property insurers traditionally give either premium discounts or deductible discounts based on the period of time the policy has been claims-free . It is possible that a small claim would result in a loss of these discounts and the actual out-of-pocket expenses that you experience would be more than the amount recovered . There is also the matter of mitigation which means that you can often contain the expense of a claim . This might cost you but your net out of pocket expenses might be reduced . The bottom line is to know your agent , know your deductible , and make sure both of you know the discounts you might already be receiving , before you call that 800 number . If the house is on fire , dont wait !
If your homeowners premium increased you should check to see if the coverage amount also increased . If the coverage has not changed either the company has had to file for a rate increase due to the loss pattern in your area or you have filed a claim . Filing a claim can cause a discount you were enjoying to be removed regardless of the amount paid on the claim .
In general , no , home insurance will not cover wet rot . A homeowners policy is there to protect you from the sudden and accidental , not the ongoing . To file a claim , you have to be able to pinpoint what happened and when it happened . Wet rot describes a long time , ongoing circumstance . Your homeowners policy is designed to make you whole after an `` occurrence '' . It 's not designed to maintain your home . If you have a condition that could , potentially , damage your home , it 's the homeowners responsibility to correct that condition to protect your home from future damage . This brings up the question of the cost of your homeowners insurance . Every claim impacts the loss ratio of your company and , ultimately , your rates . Want to control the cost of your homeowners insurance ? Take a higher deductible and pay for the smaller things yourself . You 'll save money in the long run .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is Best Retirement Plan For A Small Business ?
Each business owner needs to determine which retirement plan is suitable for their organization . If the sole proprietor is also the only employee , with limited contributions an IRA may suffice . But if an IRA contribution is too low , an SEP IRA may be a better option . For employers who have several employees , a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- may serve the organization by offering such a plan as an employee recruiting and retention tool .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
what does Simple retirement plan mean ? It means that someone is using a boilerplate retirement plan created by the IRS to provide a retirement program for a small business . I love Simples as their name says it all . A Simple is a straight forward plan design with only a few requirements to comply with to have the plan . The best part for a small business owner is it costs next to nothing to provide . There is no testing of the plan which costs money . Just a nominal per head fee of active participants . The employer does n't pay fees for testing employees and accounting for employees who are n't in the plan . For a small business a Simple is a great choice for putting a retirement plan together for employees .
Which retirement plan is best for small business ? Personally , I like the SIMPLE retirement plan for use with small business . Why ? because it 's SIMPLE ! This IRS created plan is one of the most inexpensive plans out there for a small business . For the business owner the rules are simple and clear . NO testing , no ERISA planmath nonsense , no per head fees for all employees -LRB- including those that do n't participate -RRB- , in other words if you follow the IRS guidelines you save about $ 3k to $ 5k a year in administration fees . A simple involves matching -LRB- 3 % a minimum of 3 out of every 5 years or 1 % for those two years -RRB- employees who participate in the plan . While this may seem like a lot of moneyfor amatch . Think of it this way . You are rewarding your employees who stay with you , rather than a bunch of guys downtown who administer plans . Look closer into these retirement plans . They are easy to establish , easy to administer and extremely inexpensive to run .
what is a SIMPLE retirement plan ? A Simple is an inexpensive opportunity for a small business to have a retirement plan that does n't break the bank in advisor fees . A Simple plan is an IRS approved plan with only a few steps to follow so expensive testing and record keeping are n't necessary . For any small business who are considering a retirement plan to offer , this should be right on top as it does provide a great platform for a business who would rather use it 's money to put towards employees retirements rather than third party administers plans .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
What retirement plan is best for small business ? In my opinion I feel SIMPLE plans offer a great value to small business employers who want to set up a qualified plan that is easy to install , easy to account for and simply easy to maintain . What 's that like three `` easys '' and we 're talking qualified plans ? That should sell anybody to at least look at the simple as an option .
No , statistically around 99 % large companies in the US -LRB- 200 + employees -RRB- offer health benefits , about 96 % of medium companies -LRB- 50-199 employees -RRB- offer health benefits , and about 92 % of small companies -LRB- < 49 employees -RRB- offer health benefits . There may be a significant impact on the small employer statistics as state and federal exchanges become available . However I can confidently say that any such statistical shift in the small employer health benefits market will most likely be a short term -LRB- perhaps 3-5 year -RRB- variation that will in time reflect a very small impact in the % of small businesses offering health benefits . The complex structuring options and technical details will render the small business exchanges as effective at delivering optimal results as online tax software is in helping someone who is not well versed in accounting manage pay-roll and state/federal tax obligations/deductions . Also the businesses who do not provide meaningful benefit programs to their employees will find it hard to compete with the other companies who are able to leverage such programs to provide them with a distinct competitive advantage . That being said the exchanges will revolutionize the marketplace of individual health insurance policies .
Due to how fluid and dynamic the small business world is you will never be able to get a perfectly accurate figure on how many small businesses offer health insurance to their employees . However , studies over the last few years have show a slow but steady decline in the percentage of small businesses who offer group health insurance to their employees . In 2013 we witnessed the first time that the estimated percentage of small businesses offering group health insurance fell below the 50 % level , coming in at a little over 49 % . It is projected that this level will decrease somewhat further -LRB- probably mid-40 % range -RRB- when 2014 statistics can be compiled .
What factors to consider when creating a retirement plan ? COST . Different plans have different costs associated with the operation of a plan . Administrative cost and fees can be greater than the cost of matching for some small business plans . A business owner has to look at a variety of options in plan design to keep the administrative costs low and money spent towards providinga plan , goes towards the employees the employer actually wants to reward . Most companies have set aside funds to provide for administrative costs and matching for their retirement plans . The thing is the higher your administration costs , the less money an employer has to give to the employees of the business . There are many plan choices out there to choose from . I would suggest finding a plan that allows you to reward the people who work for you , not so much for the people that bill you -LRB- plan administrators -RRB- .
Which retirement plan is right for your small business depends on what you what your objectives are and the resources you are willing to commit . Retirement plans for all employees ? Key employees only ? In Canada , if you choose a group RRSP or a defined contribution pension plan , the company can determine the amount of contribution . The amount of the retirement income value or pension depends on investment growth . If you choose a defined benefit pension plan , the the company guarantees the amount of the retirement income and the amount of contribution is unknown . In that case the risk to the company increases . There are a number of solutions available depending on your objectives . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
There are still too many variables to provide you a definitive answer . The state or states your workforce is located in , the size of your small business -LRB- less than 50 or greater than 50 employees ? -RRB- , the ages of your employees/spouses/dependent children to be covered , the number of dependent children to be covered , perhaps tobacco usage , plus factors such as health plan design all vary from group to group but are critical features defining fully insured health insurance rates in ObamaCare compliant plan designs . Speaking in very generic terms based upon marketplace quoting as of July 2014 , I would estimate unit cost ranges for small group plans -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- on a composite rated basis to generally fall within the following ranges : Employee Only : $ 250 to $ 425 Median : $ 325 Spousal Unit : $ 280 to $ 500 Median : $ 395 Per Child Unit -LRB- 3 max -RRB- $ 85 to $ 175Median : $ 120 -LRB- Note : dependent children age 21 to 26 charged separate young adult rate -RRB- This is based onno exhaustive analysis , just from what I have seen and gathered from my peers here in the mid-south . If someone were to give me the vague `` what would health insurance costs be for my small business '' questionto dosome business cost projections these would be reasonable ranges to expect to work within and approximate average costs per covered unit to experience at this time .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
I presume that you are not eligible for Medicare for some reason . You might investigate individual health insurance though with the open enrollment season having concluded on February 15th you would have to have a `` Change of Life Status '' event occur or qualify under the provisions of the upcoming special election period beginning March 15th -LRB- this is for people who were uninsured in 2014 and have just figured out they are going to have to pay the individual mandate tax penalty and that they would be subject to the individual tax mandate penalty for the 2015 tax year -RRB- . If you were to qualify you would have to be prepared to pay a pretty high monthly premium . If you have a business or have a spouse that has a business and some employees you might consider a group health plan . I recently wrote a small group where a man about your age had emigrated from Europe because he had married an American lady about 20 years younger than him and they had a small business with a couple of other employees . that man is now covered as his spouse 's dependent under their small group plan .
Employer Sponsored Retirement Plan is generally an ERISA qualified plan that a business sponsors for their employees with employee tax deductible contributions and sometimes an employer contribution match . An example of such a plan is the popular 401k retirement plan offered by many corporations and small businesses alike .
I would recommend two things : 1 -RRB- talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your home and auto policies . Some companies may allow very small business type risks as incidental based upon the type of business and the revenue generated . For example , a homeowners liability may cover a small lawn mowing business your son may have cutting a few lawns in the neighborhood , but may not cover an animal boarding operation . Likewise a personal auto policy may not provide any coverage at all for any business activity . 2 -RRB- talk to your attorney as an additional trusted advisor about the potential legal liability exposures that such a venture may bring . Remember too a very important principal : insurance only provides protection , it does not limit liability .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is It Mandatory To Have Renters Insurance ?
It is generally only mandatory if your building owner requires Renters Insurance as a condition of your lease . That having been said , obtainig Renters Insurance is a very smart decision for the protection it provides you . If your furnishings for example , were destroyed in a fire that severely damaged the building , your landlord would not be providing you with any financial support for you to replace your belongings . Likewise , if somehow you caused damage to your apartment , the liability portion of your Renters Insurance would cover the repair . Without it , you would either have to pay out of pocket or lose all or a portion of your security deposit .
As of this point in time , I am not aware of any local , state , or federal regulations that require a person to have renters insurance . That does n't mean that the landlord through the use of the rental or lease agreement that they could n't require a renter to have renters insurance to be accepted as a tenant .
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
To the best of my knowledge renters insurance is not required by any state or by the federal government . Whether or not renters insurance is mandatory for a specific premise is solely up to the landlord or property owner . It is ultimately there call as to have renters insurance as a requirement of the rental agreement that you sign . Renters insurance is typically very inexpensive so call a local agent to get pricing and secure coverage .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
Renters insurance is not mandatory , however it 's a good idea to have and affordable . Your landlord policy only covers the structure and not your personal items . It may even help reduce your auto policy by having renters insurance . Renters insurance policies cover medical bills for someone hurt when they visit you , it covers liability claims in case someone is injured on your rented property as well . It also covers your personal items in case of fire or a complete loss . Allen Beach
It is generally only mandatory if your building owner requires Renters Insurance as a condition of your lease . That having been said , obtainig Renters Insurance is a very smart decision for the protection it provides you . If your furnishings for example , were destroyed in a fire that severely damaged the building , your landlord would not be providing you with any financial support for you to replace your belongings . Likewise , if somehow you caused damage to your apartment , the liability portion of your Renters Insurance would cover the repair . Without it , you would either have to pay out of pocket or lose all or a portion of your security deposit .
Renters insurance should always be mandatory . Its a very inexpensive policy , covers so many different type of instances and most often the savings on your auto insurance more than pays for renters insurance . Landlords that require it are genius . Remember your landlord has -LRB- should -RRB- insurance to cover the structure -LRB- house -RRB- , however this policy WILL NOT cover you , your stuff or pay to relocate you if there is a fire , water loss , burglary etc. . For a small cost usually 60 dollars or so a year you 've got protection for you stuff -LRB- clothes , furniture , books , computers ect -RRB- anywhere in the world !
Purchasing life insurance is not mandatory , unless it is stipulated in a contract you sign or a loan that you take out . Of course , the insurance company will also decide if you have an insurable interest , allowing you to purchase coverage . But in the vast majority of situations , buying life insurance is not mandatory .
Life insurance is not usually mandatory or by law such as car insurance and now health insurance . The exception would be if you were ordered by a judge in a court case such as a divorce or child custody case . The other situation causing life insurance would be a contractual agreement . Some examples of a contractual life insurance agreement would be a secured loan or a business partnership agreement known as `` buy sell life insurance '' . Other than these types of special arrangements life insurance is not considered mandatory , but if someone you care about depends on you for care or finances then out of responsibility you should carry life insurance . Remember life insurance is not for you , it is for them .
That is a great question ! The answer is one of those , `` no , but you should '' answers . Like health insurance is n't mandatory , having it is very wise , and not having it has penalties . It iskind of like that with your prescription coverage . While it is n't mandatory to have , the cost of your prescriptions without it is often prohibitive . A prescription that Medicare covers may only cost you a couple of dollars , that without the coverage would cost $ 45-50 dollars or more . On a fixed income , and looking at stretching a retirement fund , I 'd wholeheartedly recommend that you enroll in the plan . Thanks for asking !
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
Auto insurance is mandatory here in Ohio . As an Ohio broker since 1980 -LRB- Has it been that long ? -RRB- , we help consumers meet the mandatory minimum liability requirement in the most affordable way . By shopping multiple companies , consumers can view and compare the lowest rates . Also , keep in mind that it is always a good idea to consider liability limits higher than what is legally required . Although youthful rates can be a bit expensive , as you get older , rates typically reduce quite a bit . This is an ideal time to review your existing coverage . Ironically , the Ohio state minimum limits were recently increased from $ 12,500 / $ 25,000 to $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 . It had been quite a while since the limits were increased .
As Mr. Harris indicates , car insurance is mandatory in all States . Mandatory auto insurance limits vary by State , however . The specific limits for your State can be found on your particular State 's Insurance Commissioner website or by simply searching the web for auto liability limits , with the name of your State . Limits vary from $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 / $ 10,000 in Florida -LRB- Yikes ! -RRB- to $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 55,000 in Wisconsin . The first two dollar amounts are for bodily injury from an accident and the third amount is for property damage to others , from that accident . For example : Using Wisconsin limits , In an insured driver 's liability situation , the policy would pay no more than $ 50,000 to any one injured person but no more than $ 100,000 , no matter how many people were injured . So , if three people were injured and two of them received $ 50,000 each , the third injured person would not be collecting from the policy , since the $ 100,000 limit would have been exhausted . As for the property damage to others , the policy would pay no more than $ 55,000 in total to one or more claimants . .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
Great Question . Home insurance is mandatory in California only if you have a mortgage on the house . If you still make payments to the bank on the home they will have you buy home owners insurance and force you to keep it . If your home is paid off then having insurance is a good choice but not required . Good Luck
No , Life Insurance is not mandatory in New Mexico or any other state . At this time , health insurance is the only insurance in the process of becoming mandatory for most Americans , and liability car insurance is mandatory in many states . Whether or not you buy Life Insurance is up to you .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Where Can I Find Car Insurance Quotes ?
Step out the front door and holler I WILL BUY INSURANCE ! Actually , you do not have to go outside you can look in yellow pages , newspaper , daily bargin papers , internet or go to an agents office . If you or a good friend knows a trustworthy agent who will advise you about coverages go see the person . When there is a question about service or claims then you have a enabler to help you . Good luck on the rest !
Free online car insurance quotes can be found on many websites . And , of course , a broker can provide prices . Choosing an experienced broker will help you find the most affordable offers . And it 's important that his/her website is informational , updated and allows you to provide simple information to receive the quote . Naturally , you should never pay a fee or provide your social security number to view rates . A good broker will save you time , money and a lot of frustration .
Certainly you could start by searching on line as there are any number of providers these days who offer direct line coverage . However , I think that the best place to start is by talking to your local Insurance Professional . Whether they represent a number of companies or just one , licensed insurance professionals can help to answer your questions , listen to your needs and concerns and present to you a well thought out car insurance that meets your needs and fits your budget .
You can easily compare term life insurance quotes by going to a website that shows you quotes from multiple companies . If you pick a website with `` instant '' quotes , the quotes will come up comparing quotes from different companies , and you can then change variables to compare quotes on different policies within that company . Once you see a policy you are interested in , be sure to talk to someone at that agency , or communicate by email , so that you can be sure you qualify for that particular rate . No quote engine can cover every question , and you may find that there is an even lower price out there for you , or a policy that works better for your needs . But comparing quotes online is a good place to start .
The quote engine on my website quotes to $ 5,000,000 . You can input the gender , ages , build , and health conditions of the persons you are looking to cover to get an idea of what the premiums will be for them . Take the result times 2.35 to get the approximate premium for $ 12,000,000 . My expertise is in finding the best health rating and price for each person . Whenever you are looking at more than one person , there is a health factor involved , that possibly , not even the applicant is aware they have . After 12 years of finding the best quotes for hundreds of impaired risk applicants each month , I can definitely help you in that crucial and foundational step . After finding your best carrier , I would work with the `` big case '' department of that company to knock out the details . They know all the ropes so you can get the rate you qualify for . I am connected with a prestigious brokerage whose reps will bend over backwards to help get this done in the smoothest possible fashion . If you would like my personal assistance , I would be happy to help . As you can see , there are several good agents who put a lot of time answering consumer questions on this website , and I 'm sure that all of us are qualified in different ways , to pull this off for you . While we love to do this as a service , it is always a joy when one of our answers prompts someone to contact us .
California life insurance quotes can be found online through life insurance websites that have a quote engine that you can use -LRB- most do -RRB- . If you want to compare multiple companies at the same time , I would recommend using the quote engine from a life insurance broker website -LRB- brokers are insurance agents who can quote and sell products from multiple companies -RRB- . The quote engines will typically request a few pieces of data such as your name , date of birth , height/weight profile , any prescriptions you take or medical conditions you 're being treated for , the state you live in , and the amount and length of coverage to quote . Once you hit submit , an instant quote will be generated for you to review and an agent will likely follow-up with you shortly . Please note , an instant quote is , in short , just a rough estimate . The risk classification you qualify for is the MOST important factor in creating a quote because it 's what determines the premiums for the desired coverage -LRB- e.g. being approved for a standard risk class vs. a preferred plus risk class will result in very different numbers -RRB- . If you are being treated for any medical conditions or take a number of prescriptions , you will get a much more accurate response by consulting with an insurance broker.who can shop the case for you . Buying life insurance can be a very strenuous and time consuming task when you try to do it on your own . We do not charge any fees for our services , so you can only help yourself by talking with a broker . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
The internet has dramatically changed the way people shop for life insurance , period . Finding quotes online for California or any State are pretty easy . Find a website with a life insurance quote engine and begin your quotes , keep in mind that most quotes online are just estimates you could be better off speaking with a live independent broker . Make sure to speak with a broker because he or she will shop many different companies to get you the best price and policy possible . With some technology to day online you can get quotes and buy a policy within minute 's right from your home or office if you qualify .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Car insurance is different for everyone and I would recommend you contact a local agent or 2 and have them do quotes for you . There are so many factors that determine how much you can pay such as accidents , tickets , where you live , credit , age and much more . So to give you a price answer on this board is not something any of us can do . Although each company has different pricing independent agents can help to shop for you with many companies and find the right fit for you . Good luck and I hope you find the right fit
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
The only answer I can provide is maybe , and it really depends upon your financial situation . You can drive with Public Liability and Property Damage -LRB- PLPD -RRB- insurance . This covers your liability to another party in the case of an accident . When you get sued for an accident , this is where the huge claims come into play and where most people ca n't for it out of pocket . Comprehensive and collision coverage cover damage to your own vehicle . This type of coverage is not required . Most people only carry PLPD on older cars , where it is cheaper to replace the car then it is to insure it -LRB- e.g. a winter car worth $ 1,200 -RRB- . Now , there are some contractual obligations that might require you to get comprehensive and collision insurance . An example of this is a car lease . The lessor will require full coverage and to be named as a loss payee . This way , in case its collateral is destroyed , it can recoup its financial investment . In summary , make sure you can afford replacing the car if you go with PLPD .
I would suggest looking at an instant term life insurance site in a couple of ways . Some local agents may provide an instant quote on their website . You can search for `` life insurance quotes '' and see which are offering quotes . Some sites may say quotes but they are a contact form . Some sites are actual quotes and show up immediately . You can call the agent at your convenience if you have questions . Some agent site allow you put in your application right away and get the process started . Another option is Term4Sale.com . It has a online quote then it will show your 3 agents . Look for one with a local phone number and give them a call . If you have a long term health issue , you are better served calling an agent that is independent with multiple carriers and find the best fit for you .
When using the internet to find disability insurance , try to look for an agent , and not just an insurancecompany that sells DI . Though a company can direct you to a contracted agent , it 's helpful to find someone who represents several carriers . That way , your agent can shop around to find you the best possible quote . Be sure to ask for quotes from at least two or three carriers . But do n't assume that the cheapest quote is the best , or the most expensive for that matter . Have your agent explain all the bells and whistles to you so you can accurately determine what policy provisions are right for you .
Cheap car insurance can be as little as $ 20 or $ 30 per month , depending on where you live , the type of car you drive , your age , and of course , the liability limits you have . Some carriers offer discounts that can total as much as 50 % . It is , however , important to understand that state minimum liability limits may leave you underinsured . Although low liability limits result in very cheap pricing , it 's important that we , as experienced unbiased brokers , advise you which coverages may be the most appropriate . To find the lowest rates , always utilize an experienced broker . Not only do we offer unbiased advice and top-notch websites , but you can also save time and money by quickly finding the best prices . The quoting process typically takes only a few minutes and you 'll be able to view the best options in your area .
There are many sites where you can get instant health insurance quotes online . When you visit a page that provides online quotes , you follow the prompts on the screen . However , when it comes to health insurance , I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker because of all of the moving parts involved and it can be difficult for some to compare plans.You can run instant health quotes on my website if you 'd like -LRB- link available on my profile page -RRB- as well as other types including life , disablity , senior insurance , etc. . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are many sites where you can get instant health insurance quotes online . When you visit a page that provides online quotes , you follow the prompts on the screen . When it comes to health insurance , I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker because of all of the moving parts involved and it can be difficult for some to compare plans.You can run instant health quotes on my website if you 'd like -LRB- link available on my profile page -RRB- as well as other types including life , disablity , senior insurance , etc.Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are many sites where you can get instant health insurance quotes online . When you visit a page that provides online quotes , you follow the prompts on the screen . When it comes to health insurance , I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker because of all of the moving parts involved and it can be difficult for some to compare plans.You can run instant health quotes on my website if you 'd like -LRB- link available on my profile page -RRB- as well as other types including life , disablity , senior insurance , etc. . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is Good Homeowners Insurance ?
A good homeowners policy will protect you and your home . I would recommend a policy that has replacement cost , liability protection and depending where you live you might need earthquake , flood , mechanical breakdown and coverage for water back up . So a good homeowners policy has a variety of coverage options and you should seek a good Independent Agent .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
To find good life insurance , find a good broker . He or she will help you determine what is good for you . What amount ... what cost ... what carrier are good for you ? A good broker will help you find out - and find this all out before you apply , so you can be confident of the outcome of underwriting . Good life insurance is a policy you are glad to buy .
A good life insurance agent has some important characteristics . A good agent is a good listener . A good agent will listen to you and will check with you to make sure that you are fully understood . A good agent communicates clearly to both you and to the insurance company . The agent should explain as completely as possible the details of the policy and patiently answer your questions . The good agent will communicate your information and concerns to the underwriting staff of the insurance company . Underwriters are usually quite conservative . The more that the agent can paint a picture that the underwriter can understand ; it is more likely that you will have a good outcome . Finally a good agent offers sound financial advice . A good agent isnt an order taker . A good agent will show you the advantages of alternate approaches to your problem . A good agent will not leave out anything vital to the case and will carefully counsel you as it regards your unique situation . Are there many good life insurance agents ? I think that there are , however , they are often in demand and do little to solicit business . You probably need to check with your colleagues and friends and locate that good life insurance agent that they trust .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Insurance companies make promises . They are regulated by the state insurance commissioner who has two charges , keep the insurance companies able to keep their promises and to keep you as a consumer happy . There are many criteria that could be used to compare homeowners companies . The overwhelming majority of companies are going to keep their promises and pay claims as they occur . The best way to find a good homeowners insurance company is to contact a good insurance agent . If you dont have an agent , get a recommendation from a friend , colleague or neighbor . The advice of the agent is what is critical and a good agent will not want to represent any suspect insurance company .
Homeowners insurance is important part of helping to protect yours ' and your family financial futures . A home is a huge investment without homeowners insurance how will you rebuild after a fire or tornado . How will your protect your assets if someone is hurt on your property if you do n't have homeowners insurance ? This is just a couple of the coverages that are provided by homeowners insurance . To find out more about what a homeowners insurance policy has to offer contact your local agent .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
A good homeowners policy will protect you and your home . I would recommend a policy that has replacement cost , liability protection and depending where you live you might need earthquake , flood , mechanical breakdown and coverage for water back up . So a good homeowners policy has a variety of coverage options and you should seek a good Independent Agent .
Insurance companies offer homeowners ' insurance policies to people who own and occupy their residence . Once foreclosure occurs , you may occupy your residence but you no longer own it . If you are allowed to remain in the home for a period of time , you may be able to contact your insurer , explain the circumstances and have your policy amended to a Tenant Homeowner form . Tenant homeowner policies are issued to people who occupy a residence but do n't own it . The coverage is similar to homeowners ' insurance except it does n't cover the structure . It covers certain damage to your personal property , additional living expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and your have to live in temporary quarters while it is being repaired and certain personal liability exposures . You may need to adjust the amount of insurance on your personal property be consistent with what it would cost you to replace all your personal things . If you move to a rented home or apartment , you may be able to amend your homeowners ' policy to a Tenant Homeowners ' form and amend the address to that of your new residence .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
I do n't know about homeowner policy availability through AAA in every State but I can speak personally for Florida . They are my homeowner carrier in Florida . Their rate was reasonably competitive and the coverages are good . The customer service was great . Therefore , since Florida is one of the least favorite States for top insurers to do business in , I would think that the chances are good they are available in most States . If you are an AAA Member , you have a chance to get a good carrier .
In general , no , home insurance will not cover wet rot . A homeowners policy is there to protect you from the sudden and accidental , not the ongoing . To file a claim , you have to be able to pinpoint what happened and when it happened . Wet rot describes a long time , ongoing circumstance . Your homeowners policy is designed to make you whole after an `` occurrence '' . It 's not designed to maintain your home . If you have a condition that could , potentially , damage your home , it 's the homeowners responsibility to correct that condition to protect your home from future damage . This brings up the question of the cost of your homeowners insurance . Every claim impacts the loss ratio of your company and , ultimately , your rates . Want to control the cost of your homeowners insurance ? Take a higher deductible and pay for the smaller things yourself . You 'll save money in the long run .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
Homeowners insurance does not cover the death of the owner . Homeowner 's insurance protects the homeowner from sudden losses relating to the structure itself . Life insurance covers the death of the homeowner . Benefits are paid to the policyholders designated beneficiaries . Often the homeowner is also the primary breadwinner , and that income is needed to continue making mortgage payments , and repairs to the property .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is A 401K Qualified Or Nonqualified ?
401 -LRB- k -RRB- refers to the section in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC -RRB- that permits employers to establish defined contribution plans for their employees . These plans qualify for special treatment under the IRC . Basically money can be contributed to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- before it is taxed . This reduces the amount of currently taxed income . The money held in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- can grow without incurring taxation . However , when funds are removed from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan , the proceeds will be taxed as ordinary income except a contribution of after-tax income .
Bank owned life insurance -LRB- BOLI -RRB- allows banks to obtain better after tax return on assets than tier 1 capital . The bank is owner and beneficiary of the life insurance , not bank executives . Regulations have tightened in recent years and banks must have a legitimate reason to own life insurance on the lives of highly compensated executives of the bank . BOLI is usually set up to informally fund nonqualified benefit plans for selected executives . The executive is an insured in these policies but has no ownership interest . The executive 's family not a beneficiary of the policy though the nonqualified benefit agreements may have death benefit provisions which are income taxable to them unlike a life insurance policy death benefit . Though not BOLI , split dollar arrangements have reemerged which can overcome most BOLI shortcomings and allow both the bank and the executive to directly participate in and benefit from a life insurance contract .
The service addresses both ERISA qualified plans and other nonqualified supplemental retirement plans . Assuming this question is addressing ERISA qualified plans , there are several retirement plans such as the popular 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- and 412 -LRB- i -RRB- as well as others such as cash balance plans defined benefit plans , defined contribution plans , profit sharing plans .
No , the retirement plan offered by the military is not qualified . Public sector pension plans are not covered by ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- , and in order for a retirement plan to be qualified , it must meet the regulations set forth by ERISA . Therefore , the military 's retirement plan offered through the federal government is nonqualified .
Generally speaking , if the annuity is nonqualified , the beneficiary of an annuity will pay taxes on the earnings . The basis , or monetary contribution that purchased the annuity , is not taxed . How the beneficiary is taxed depends on whether they receive the annuity in a lump sum or whether they annuitize it -LRB- take periodic payments -RRB- . If the annuity was tax qualified when purchased , taxes are paid on both the basis -LRB- original contribution -RRB- and the earnings .
Is a variable annuity a security ? Yes , a variable annuity is subject to the same rules and oversight of the SEC that a security would be . A person selling variable annuities must be securities registered and comply with all the transaction rules established by FINRA and the SEC . One other thing to think about if you 're considering a variable annuity is that the RISK in type of product is more along the lines of a stock purchase than a nonqualified product like a fixed annuity .
Company owned life insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is taken out on key employees in the company . The company is the owner , payer , and beneficiary of these policies . If the key employee should pass away , the company has funds to recruit a new employee to replace them and to carry on operations during that transition time . If the Corporate Owned Life Insurance is a cash value policy . it can be used as an informal funding vehicle for a nonqualified deferred compensation -LRB- NQDC -RRB- plan .
A life insurance retirement plan is a nonqualified , tax deferred cash value accumulating policy . To maximize the accumulating cash values , the policy must be designed with lowest cost of insurance death benefit option non modified endowment contract . The contract death benefit and death benefit options must be managed throughout the life on the insurance to minimize the cost of insurance . There are several crediting methods available depending upon your risk tolerance . If the contract is designed correctly , the policy can generate tax free withdrawals to basis and policy loans of gain as long as the contract is kept in force for the life of the insured .
Section 457 plans are nonqualified deferred compensation plans available only to state and local government employers , and nongovernment organizations exempt from tax under IRC Section 501 . Generally 457 plans are utilized for two reasons - 1 . As deferred compensation plans that allow participants to reduce their taxable salary in a manner similar to that of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans generally are not available to state and local government organizations . 2 . As supplemental benefit plans that provide executives with supplemental retirement income .
Cash value life insurance products are frequently used as a retirement planning vehicle . Most nonqualified retirement plans , from the largest to the smallest companies in America , use life insurance to informally fund the retirement payments companies make to their retiring executives . So , it would stand to reason that what works for those arrangements can work for individuals , too ! With the right products , an experienced life insurance professional can design a supplemental retirement plan using life insurance to provide income in retirement , tax free -LRB- through policy loans -RRB- . Whole life is not always the best choice in terms of efficiency and flexibility . Universal life based products are better , in my experience .
Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is life insurance that a corporation takes out on the lives of one or more employees , with the benefits payable to the corporation or the employee 's families . COLI can be structured to fund certain types of nonqualified plans , such as split-dollar life insurance that allows the company to recoup its premium with part of the death benefit and the rest of the death benefit going to the employees ' beneficiaries . Many corporations these days use COLI to insure key employees , with the corporation receiving the death benefit so they can find and hire a new employee , or as part of a buy-sell agreement so they can buy a partner 's share . of stock .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com . Today 's question is : is a single premium annuity a good investment ? Well remember , generally these are interest driven products and single premium annuities could be a period certain . It could be ten years certain . It could be 20 years certain or one of the most popular out there right now is you 're actually purchasing a lifetime of income with a single premium immediate annuity . If it 's nonqualified the money which you originally put into it called basis comes out blended with the gain on this , so there 's a little bit of a tax advantage there . Remember , you ca n't outlive this , so if you become the Guinness Book of World Records or you 're one of Willard Scott 's people who turn 100 every day , you 're going to get that payment and it 's there for the rest of your life . A lot of people like immediate annuities to be the underpinning or their foundation of their retirement . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The corporation is either the total or partial beneficiary on the policy , and an employee or group of employees , owner or debtor is listed as the insured -LRB- s -RRB- . Fundamentally , COLI differs from group life insurance policies that are typically offered to most or all of the employees in a company , because this type of insurance is designed to protect the employees and their families and not the company itself . COLI can be structured in many different ways to accomplish many different objectives . One of the most common is to fund certain types of nonqualified plans , such as a split-dollar life insurance policy that allows the company to recoup its premium outlay into the policy by naming itself as the beneficiary for the amount of premium paid , with the remainder going to the employee who is the insured on the policy . Other forms of COLI include key person life insurance that pays the company a death benefit upon the death of a key employee , and buy-sell agreements that fund the buyout of a deceased partner or owner of a business . In many cases , the death benefit is used to buy some or all of the shares of company stock owned by the deceased -LRB- such as with a closely-held business -RRB- . COLI is also frequently used as a means of recovering the cost of funding various types of employee benefits .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
In qualified retirement plans , it may make sense to annuitize the annuity before required minimum distributions become mandatory . In nonqualified retirement planning strategies , you may want to use the staggering annuity product tactic called annuity laddering to maximized tax deferral and utilize the combination of different annuities along you retirement timeline .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Impaired Risk Life Insurance ?
Impaired Risk Life Insurance is just regular life insurance used to cover people with health conditions or other risk factors . Agents who specialize in impaired risk life insurance have an extensive knowledge of health conditions and have become aware of what life insurance underwriters look at when determining whether they can approve a policy , or what health rating to give . Agencies that specialize in impaired risk life insurance carry a wide variety of products so that if their clients are unable to get medically underwritten coverage , they have simplified or guaranteed issue choices that will cover them .
Impaired Risk Life Insurance is just regular life insurance used to cover people with health conditions or other risk factors . Agents who specialize in impaired risk life insurance have an extensive knowledge of health conditions and have become aware of what life insurance underwriters look at when determining whether they can approve a policy , or what health rating to give . Agencies that specialize in impaired risk life insurance carry a wide variety of products so that if their clients are unable to get medically underwritten coverage , they have simplified or guaranteed issue choices that will cover them .
Using a life insurance agency that specializes in `` impaired risk '' life insurance is a good way to make sure that you are getting the best possible diabetic life insurance rate . One 's method of diabetic treatment , history of A1C 's , age at diagnosis , whether there are complications from diabetes , weight , tobacco use , and having additional health conditions all have a huge bearing on what medically underwritten policy the person with diabetes can qualify for , and how much he/she will pay . Having specialized in diabetic life insurance for over 10 years , I have found that there are no simple rules or tricks for getting someone the best price . You really have to know what you are doing . If just looking for a small policy with no exam , there are also lots of choices , and again , diabetic control can make a big difference in what you policy you qualify for and what price you will pay . It is very difficult to sift through all that without the assistance of an experienced , impaired risk life insurance agent who is able to shop a number of carriers to find you the most affordable diabetes life insurance rate .
There are companies that specialize and underwrite life insurance for what is documented as high risk also termed as impaired risk . If you been denied by one company because you are not able to obtain insurance by another company then a company that issues these policies are available . The rates may be a little more but will write you a policy at what is called guaranteed issue . The amount is at a set benefit that will satisfy the applicant . I am partnered with impaired risk companies .
High risk life insurance is coverage issued to persons who have a risk of passing away at a younger age than the general population . None of the policies I sell classify high risk based on occupation . A corrections officer can get the same rate as a business owner , as long as their health is the same . Some high risk policies cater to those who are overweight . Some target certain health conditions . Some are more favorable than other companies for those who have gone through treatment for substance abuse , regularly travel to foreign countries , participate in dangerous hobbies , or have unstable finances . To find the policy that best suits your particular kind of high risk , contact an impaired risk specialist such as myself . We have access to many different companies and can match you up with the one that is most lenient with your unique risk factors .
Working with an impaired risk agency can help you get a life insurance policy with ulcerative colitis , without having to do any trial and error and being declined . They will know the questions to ask , and in turn , ask underwriters so that you are put with the best life insurance company for your particular situation . If you have uncontrolled ulcerative colitis , there are always simplified issue policies you can get . Again , an impaired risk specialist can help you figure it out very quickly .
People who participate in high risk activities or have impaired health conditions often are charged much higher premiums for life insurance , whether they are applying for term or permanent coverage . The price that you pay is determined by your age , the requested amount of coverage , and risk classification . If the carrier offers a substandard/table-rating for the coverage , the premiums will usually be based off of the standard risk class with an extra 25 % increase for each extra letter assigned -LRB- the 25 % figure can vary by carrier - e.g. some may use 17 % , etc. -RRB- . For example , a Table B rating would cost the standard rate plus 50 % -LRB- B = 2 tables -RRB- , a Table D rating would cost double the standard rate -LRB- D = 4 tables -RRB- , etc. . Insurance companies may also look at assigning a flat extra rating with a specified cost per thousand dollars of insurance -LRB- such as $ 5.00 per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . Flat extras may be applied for only a few years , or for the life of the policy and are more commonly assigned for high-risk activities . Table-ratings are more commonly given for high-risk health conditions . I often also see many people just apply for a bunch of companies at the same time because they 're a high-risk individual . DO NOT do this ! . Applying for coverage with more than one company at the same time could hurt your chances of securing a policy . It is in your best interest to find out before applying what the most likely offer will be from 10-15 different companies so that you know what to expect and know that you are getting the best possible offer . I highly recommend working with an independent agent who can look at multiple companies for you - trying to get that information can be very difficult to do on your own . This is the exact field my group specializes in and would be happy to be of assistance with your program .
There are many kinds of life insurance policies , some harder to get than others . At our office , we start with the hardest to get -LRB- least expensive -RRB- and work our way through the choices until we find the best price and policy for which our clients will qualify . In states that offer it , guaranteed issue life insurance is the easiest to get , and most expensive . But it also has age limitations , so not everyone can get it . Not counting guaranteed issue life insurance or simplified issue life insurance -LRB- both good options for those who can not get anything else -RRB- , here are some things that could keep you from getting medically underwritten Life Insurance : 1 . A serious health condition that is not , or can not be , controlled . 2 . AIDS or HIV positive 3 . Drug or alcohol treatment in the last year 4 . Current or recent felony or probation 5 . Cancer , heart attack or stroke within the past year 6 . Having had some tests done to determine if you have a health condition , with the results not yet back . Or a surgery coming up shortly ; most companies will postpone until the surgery is over . 7 . Not having US citizenship , work VISA or Green Card 8 . Suspended drivers license 9 . Cognitive impairment 10 . A child under 20 with a serious health condition , whether controlled or not 11 . Being in a wheelchair and/or needing assistance to do activities of daily living such as dressing or bathing 12 . Being on oxygen or dialysis 13 . Being diagnosed as terminally ill Again , there are options for most situations , even those above , if you get the right type of policy . An agency that understands impaired risk underwriting , and that carries many different types of life insurance , is your best bet for finding a policy when you have a challenging health or risk history .
Some things that can disqualify you for all but guaranteed issue life insurance are : very poor health , drug/alcohol abuse , recent bankruptcy . citizenship requirements , income requirements , and a suspended drivers license . Every policy has age parameters that the applicant must meet , and if applying for guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- for which you can not be disqualified for health or other risk -RRB- , the minimum age is usually 40 + . Children who are intellectually handicapped , have type 1 diabetes , or are born with congenital diseases may not be able to find coverage until they are adults . That being said , there are life insurance policies of all types and for all types of health and other risk factors . Some states have more options than others . Contact an impaired risk life insurance agent or online agency and you may find that what you thought would disqualify you for life insurance is no problem at all .
People with many forms of mental illness can get life insurance . Bear in mind that this term can cover a wide range of impairments . I know firsthand that many of them are insurable . A lot of it boils down to the need for the life insurance . Almost anybody can qualify for a burial policy . Depending on the age of the insured , and the state of residence , a number of small policies could be available . Wont cost too much , and gets the job done . But what if you need more substantial coverage ? For example , I worked with a family who had an adult son who is mentally retarded . He was reasonably self-sufficient . He actually worked for his father part-time , and did missionary work first church . He had the skills and personality to go door-to-door and spread his gospel . The insurance company gave us money for not just final expenses , but then some for the family . There was a co-dependence there that was insurable . You can see that people who are mentally ill can establish themselves as a valued member of the group . The members of the group therefore have an insurable interest in them , and deserve money to compensate for their loss . And this could include people with many other impairments . Autism , depression , severe anxiety , PTSD . ADD . OCD . People with any and all of these can be fairly high functioning , and therefore insurable . Dont forget one other important item : planning for people with special needs . Folks with impairments can be functional , but can also remain dependent on their family members . What if those family members die ? Life insurance is needed on on the parents , or responsible siblings , so that the dependent family member can remain self-sufficient . Now , with regard to the choice of carrier : there is not a hot list of companies that take people with mental illness . Potential applicants need to be prequalified to identify the carrier with the most interest in this particular case at this particular time . And that could change from quarter to quarter , or from year-to-year . It is the job of the broker to know which companies like which types of cases .
The question is too broad and its never good to give false hope in securing life insurance when you have cancer . But what kind of cancer do you have ? What stage of cancer is it ? What medical regiment or surgery has taken place or has been recommended and not taken place . Life insurance underwriting has become more benevolent regarding certain cancers over the last decade . Age also can be a factor if the final underwriting offer . Some cancers can be issued standard . Recent bouts of late stage cancer can be declined . Keep in mind that there are recognized impaired risk life insurance companies that seem to specialize in substandard business .
A swimming pool is an attractive luxury and may in many ways enhance the sales value of your home , but your insurance company factors it as a possible risk . Homes are insured based on reconstruction value and relative risk to the insuring carrier . A swimming pool can pose a threat to the carrier since there lies the possibility of danger and a personal liability . It is more likely that a child or impaired adult may become injured in or by the pool rather than your home being destroyed by fire . In most cities around the country , there is an ordinance in force requiring homeowners to have swimming pools within a fenced yard protected by a latched gate so not to invite strangers to the use of the pool without the owner 's permission and knowledge ; insurance companies all impose the condition that a swimming pool is in a fenced and gated area without public access . Even though the swimming pool poses a greater liability risk , most insurance carriers do not assess an increase in premium ; however , they will always ask if you have a diving board and/or slide . The diving board and slide pose a much greater risk than the swimming pool itself . Some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board , slide or a trampoline in the yard . For homeowners with a swimming pool , it is highly recommended to carry the highest available personal liability insurance limit ; most likely $ 500,000 , in most States , there is no deductible applicable to the liability portion of the policy and the premium is unlikely to cost more than $ 40 - $ 80 per year for the additional liability insurance coverage . If this topic is of greater concern , you may purchase a Personal Umbrella Policy which in most cases will provide an Excess Form of liability up to $ 5 Million of coverage for a separate premium .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
Enhanced annuities are also called impaired annuities . When calculating how much lump sum premium is needed to provide a given income for your lifetime , insurance companies use actuarial tables . These tables are based on age , sex and health . If your life expectancy is much lower based on a health impairment for example you could apply for an enhanced annuity . If approved your level of income would be higher . That is a simple explanation of a potentially complex subject . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Often , different companies have good life insurance for different needs . E.g. . Some companies are better with `` impaired risk '' cases -LRB- policies for people with health conditions or other risk factors -RRB- . Some are better for seniors . Some are better for buying Whole Life , while others are better for Term Life . While there are many good life insurance companies , using one that is good for your unique needs can save you a tremendous amount of money , and/or get you a far superior policy . To find the best life insurance company for your family or business , contact a broker that can shop multiple companies for you . This can also save you time and stress .
Like the answer to many things in life , the answer is it depends ; what exactly it depends on is what you hope to accomplish with the fixed , or equity indexed annuity . If you are hoping to establish a life time income that can not be outlived , while protecting your beneficiaries if you pass away prematurely , a fixed index annuity with an income rider will accomplish this . If you want to participate in market growth linked to the S&P 500 , yet be protected 100 % against market declines , this product will accomplish this as well . Lastly , one of the biggest derailments of sound retirement planning is the threat of health impairments , not covered by traditional health insurance . By choosing the proper index annuity , with the proper income rider , the income stream will double , usually for five to eight years , during impairment . You need to talk to an adviser that will recommend the proper annuity and income rider , based on your personal situation . If all of the above mentioned factors are in place , and if they are suitable to you as an individual , the short answer is -LRB- after the long winded explanation -RRB- yes , they are very good products .
It depends on the policy . Many will pay for assisted living depending . Most long term care policies are activated by what they call `` triggers '' . You must be , in most cases , unable to preform at least two activities of daily living or be cognitively impaired . An activity of daily living may be dressing , toileting , bathing , eating , mobility that type of things . Cognitively impaired would be things like alzheimer 's or diagnosed dementia .
There 's a short answer to this ; just call me ! -LRB- sorry , I could not resist ! -RRB- . I think an answer that you may find more useful is when shopping for long term care protection , make sure you are talking to a broker or financial adviser who specializes in this area . There are several product solutions available that provide impairment or long term care protection , over and above the traditional LTC policy . For instance , there are term life insurance products that have what is known as living benefit riders , there is permanent life insurance products that have LTC riders , there is single premium LTC that has a life time 100 % money back refund guarantee , and there is asset based LTC , which uses an annuity for retirement planning , coupled with an income rider that has impairment benefits . As you can see , it can become quite complicated ; therefore you need an experienced professional that will provide objective advice , based on your individual needs .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you have heart disease . However , it is very important to share all of your health details with an impaired risk life insurance agent , so that your agent can find your lowest rate . Your diagnosis , date of diagnosis , type of medications you take , when you had procedures done , number of times you have had procedures done , and how you are doing now , all enter into what policy you can get and what rate you will pay . The variation in premiums is huge , depending on those health details . But if you gather your information and share it with an agent experienced in placing life insurance for heart disease , you will get the best possible rate . Also , heart disease is one of those health conditions that may present a lower risk as the years go by and there are no repeat events . If you were diagnosed before age 40 , going several years with no repeat events will not matter much . But if you are over 45 when you had a heart attack , stent , pacemaker , etc , going 5 or years without a recurrence could enable you to replace your policy and get a lower rate down the road .
There are a variety of conditions which can make one ineligible -LRB- uninsurable -RRB- for individual long term care insurance . The underwriting process - risk selection and risk categorization by the insurance company - is different for long term care insurance than for life insurance -LRB- mortality -RRB- or disability insurance -LRB- morbidity -RRB- . So , it is possible to be declined for life insurance but insurable for long term care insurance . At a high level , long term care insurance underwriters generally consider the proposed insureds ; height and weight , medical history , and ability to perform the activities of daily living -LRB- ADLs -RRB- . Cognitive and mobility impairments are common examples of conditions which would make one uninsurable .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Rent A Car With SR22 Insurance ?
When you have an SR-22 bond , it is because you probably had a major driving violation , or something similar . Since you may be considered a high-risk driver , it may be difficult to rent a vehicle , considering your insurance is basic . You should contact a number of rental agencies and see which ones can cover you .
An SR22 is a Financial Responsibility filing with the State informing them that you have either purchased either liability insurance or a financial responsibility bond . It will depend on the company renting the vehicle but most companies will rent you a vehicle . They may want you to , and it would be advisable in this case , to purchase the extra insurance they offer or talk with your agent before renting a car and ask his advice since he would be more aware of the situation .
An SR22 is simply an administrative requirement by your licensing agency that your insurance carrier keep them away of the status of your coverage . This is probably due to failing to have insurance , exceeding points in their rating system , or because you got caught operating a vehicle under certain other circumstances . Unless your insurance carrier prohibits the extension of liability borrowed , rented , or use of other non-owned cars , you should have coverage but the best answer will be the one your insurance company or agent gives you .
There are several way that you can do this . There are Many carries that will insure you even if you do not have a license . Always check your state laws . There are carriers that understand that you may need a Sr22 to get your license and to do this you must have insurance so you purchase the insurance with out a license then after you get your license in place because you got the SR22 contact your agent it should lower your rates . You DO NOT have to own a car to get insurance . You can get in some states what is called a Non owned policy and also some states have what is called a broadform and this covers any car you drive I Highly suggest that you contact a reputable independent insurance agent . They should be able to guide you through the proper laws and rules for your state .
There are several carriers that will insure you if you have no license If you are needing to get your license and to get that you need a what is called a SR22 which means you will maintain insurance . Then you can get an insurance policy at first with no license then once you get the SR22 you get your license and then change your insurance to having a license and the rates will lower . You need to explain to your agent that you are trying to get your license and that you ca n't get it with our insurance . the average cost for a SR22 is $ 25.00 ever 6 months plus the price of insurance . Each state is different but there are carriers that will insure you .
An SR22 is n't insurance . It is a state filing that attaches onto an auto insurance policy . an sr22 is a guarantee that you are carrying at least the state minimum auto insurance liability coverage . thus the cost of an sr22 can vary greatly , because it is highly dependent of your auto insurance rate . Things such as what vehicle you are driving , what coverages you need , your driving record , your age , and other things all go into that rating .
An SR22 is nothing more than an administrative trail of the status of your auto insurance coverage . The form is filed because the State licensing agency has determined a need to be aware of the status of your coverage , usually due to failing to have insurance or having committed any of several offenses of driving laws . An SR22 is merely attached to your insurance record and your carrier agrees to submit status updates to your state bureau of motor vehicles . An SR22 does not provide any coverage .
This would be a non owners Insurance and is basically an auto insurance policy without a car , so yes you can . A policy like this is very similar to a conventional auto insurance policy . SR22 can be for different reasons but the most common is for DUI and for a person who do n't own a vehicle . This will reinstate your license with the DMV as long as you keep paying your premiums until the DMV states you do n't need an sr22 any more .
In Virginia , you can get an insurance policy and file an SR22 which would allow you to get your license back . You have to check with DMV to see what fines need to be paid but you can get insurance . DMV will inform you how long the SR22 is required but in most cases it 's between 1 - 3 years .
Keep in mind that an SR22 really is n't insurance at all . It is a state filing that attaches onto auto insurance . For people who do not own vehicles , the SR22 can be attached to either a named operators policy -LRB- aka non-owners policy -RRB- or a broad form named driver auto insurance policy .
States have different rules but in Virginia you have to turn in your tags before cancelling your insurance . If you have tags on a car , regardless if the car is drivable or not , you have to maintain insurance . Failure to do so will result in a suspension of your driver 's license , fines and an SR22 .
There are carriers in Montana that can cover you with a suspended license . Some carriers in other states may have different guidelines but many will write it . If you are required to get an SR22 so you can get your license back after you have your license back the carrier will adjust your rates with a valid license .
Yes you can , most likely with an SR22 filing . Although it is illegal , people do drive with suspended licenses . Expect to pay a higher rate with a high risk auto insurance carrier . Many people with suspended licenses must be able to show proof of insurance before their licenses will be reinstated .
Yes . For drivers who do not own vehicles , they can purchase what is known as a named operators policy . These policies are most common when a non-owner needs an sr22 filing to reinstate their license . Some states also have an alternative option of purchasing a broadform named drivers policy . Either policy will work for non-owners . But neither policy offers comprehensive or collision coverage on the vehicle the insured is driving . Only liability , medical , and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverages are offered on this policy .
there are 2 options , depending on the state you live in : a named operator policy or a broadform named driver policy -LRB- A third option would be a financial responsibility bond , but those are very rare . Ohio may be the only state that has it -RRB- . most states have the named operator policy , quite a few states have the broadform policy . both policies offer liability , medical payments , and uninsured motorist coverage . But neither policy offers comprehensive or collision coverage . Also , both policies will work for you if you need an SR22 or FR44 filing .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is Health Insurance Gap ?
Gap Insurance is a product that was introduced a few years ago to offset a raise in deductible . Many employers have introduced this product , as health insurance has become unaffordable . So how this product works is the employer would raise the major medical deductible from $ 2500 to $ 5000 . There would be a second policy -LRB- Gap Insurance -RRB- that would offset the increase in deductible . Anything that is covered by the major medical plan and was applied to the deductible would be covered by the gap plan .
An important question in view of the growth in high deductible health plans as well as the growing number of health plan designs doing away with office visit and prescription drug copayments and making such services subject to the plan deductible and/or co-insurance . The trend is clearly for higher out-of-pocket health care expenses for many people . Properly designed GAP policies can help address many of potential medical out-of-pocket expenses a person might encounter . Poorly designed GAP policies can still leave the person with substantial out-of-pocket expenses . There are a wide variety of GAP policies currently available with more to come I am sure . The value and cost of a GAP policy will vary depending upon the type of coverage gap -LRB- s -RRB- you are trying to fill or minimize , the premium cost associated with the GAP policy , and what is covered under the GAP policy . Each individual will have to make a risk determination as to whether the amount of financial exposure is great enough and the probability of incurring covered claims is great enough to justify the GAP plan 's premium payment . Someone with office visit/urgent care and ER & prescription drug copays , a $ 1000 deductible and a $ 4000 out of-pocket maximum probably does n't need a GAP policy . On the other hand , someone with $ 6350 deductible and a two office visits/yr covered at a $ 50 copy - that person could probably use a GAP plan . Seek out an experienced , qualified health insurance broker to help you make the GAP policy decision and to find the GAP policy best suited to your needs if a GAP policy is an answer .
GAP coverage is generally purchased on a brand newvehicleeither by the lender or the insurance carrier when youpurchaseyour auto insurance . This coverage is designed to fill the GAP between what the car is valued at and the actual loan amount should there be a total loss . Auto insurance is paid on an ACV -LRB- actual cash value basis -RRB- . In the example of a new car , you may have purchased avehicleworth $ 40,000 and took out a loan . Say for example one year later you total thevehicleand the value of thevehiclea the time of loss is $ 35,000 . This amount is what the insurance company will pay . However due to interest rates and other varying factors your loan amount could be $ 38,000 at the time of loss leaving you with a $ 3,000 out of pocket expense . Or in other words a Gap . However , if you purchased the GAP coverage the Gap would be met by either the lender or insurance company , whoever you took the coverage out with . I always recommend GAP coverage on anewlypurchased vehicle . This coverage generally stays on your policy for 2-3 years and then falls offdependingon the insurance carrier . Talk to your local agent about GAP coverage on your newly purchased vehicle .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
I answered a similar question recently but the answer is the same : Also known as ` Medicare Supplement insurance ' , a ` Medi-gap insurance ' policy helps to fill some or all of the financial `` gaps '' between what a person 's Medicare insurance pays and what is left unpaid . For example , it can pay health care expenses incurred , which are unpaid by Medicare such as your deductible , your co-payments & your co-insurance . Medicare Supplement or ` Medi-gap insurance ' does not cover dental , vision , long-term care and some other items . Check to see if you need a separate Medicare Prescription Drug Plan - Part D . You probably will . You need to be under Medicare parts A & B to qualify for a ` Medi-gap ' policy . A lot of well-known carriers are able to sell this type of insurance in each State . Be sure to shop around .
That is a terrific question ! Unless you have a ton of money , unfortunately the answer is probably yes . The name says it all . There is a gap between what Medicare will cover , and what most people will need , when it comes to medical practices , procedures , and prescriptions . That gap in coverage then falls entirely upon you . For most people , the expense of the coverage is more than they can afford . To fill that gap , many health insurers created policies that help pay for those procedures , practices , and prescriptions . I 'd recommend that you speak with your adviser about your current health insurance coverage , your social security and medicare options , and the likelihood of needing a medigap plan , so that you can plan accordingly . Thank you for asking !
On an auto insurance policy gap coverage covers the gap between the cars ACV or Actual Cash Value vs. the loan value of a vehicle . This is a coverage that is purchased when a car is less then a year old and is available on most auto insurance polices for 2 to 3 years and then falls off . An example would be you purchase a brand new car for $ 20,000 and you take out a loan for $ 18,000 . Within a year you total the car . The market value or actual cash value of the car at the time of the accident is $ 16,500 due to quick depreciation . However due to the size of loan and interest rates keeping your principle up you may own $ 17,500 at the time of the accident . This makes a $ 1,000 gap the insurance company is not obligated to pay . Gap insurance would fill this gap so your loan is completely paid off and your not backwards . I recommend you have this discussion with your local agent when purchasing a new vehicle .
That is an excellent question ! There is a `` gap '' between what your Medicare coverage pays for , and what the provider charges for the treatment . That difference , along with your co-pays and deductibles are what you have to come up with . For many folks , that amount is too much . So insurers offer Medigap plans , or supplemental insurance plans , to help fill in that `` gap '' . The good part is that the plans provide a stable , easily accepted way to help cut your costs ; the bad part is that there are many to choose from , and it can be very difficult to find the one that will work best for you . It is important that you work with your health care professional to get what is best for you . Thanks for asking !
Unless you are an engineer talking about a physical bridge -LRB- excuse the poor attempt at humor -RRB- I suspect you are asking about what is commonly referred to as gap insurance in our industry . As the deductibles and out-of-pocket maximums on many individual and group health insurance plans have grown increasingly larger over the years this had led to much greater financial exposure to policy holders . Even under ObamaCare you can have a plan with a deductible in excess of $ 6000 before your coverage kicks in . Gap policies are supplemental insurance policies designed to pay a portion of or all of this increased financial exposure . They come in a variety of forms so the consumer needs to examine these policies closely to make sure they purchase a Gap plan that best fits with their major medical plan 's benefit features .
Gap Insurance is a product that was introduced a few years ago to offset a raise in deductible . Many employers have introduced this product , as health insurance has become unaffordable . So how this product works is the employer would raise the major medical deductible from $ 2500 to $ 5000 . There would be a second policy -LRB- Gap Insurance -RRB- that would offset the increase in deductible . Anything that is covered by the major medical plan and was applied to the deductible would be covered by the gap plan .
Also known as ` Medicare Supplement ' insurance , this type of health policy helps to fill some or all of the financial `` gaps '' between what a person 's medicare insurance pays and what is left unpaid . For example , it can pay health care expenses incurred and unpaid by Medicare such as a deductible , co-payments & co-insurance . Medicare Supplement insurance does not cover dental , vision , long-term care and some other items . Check to see if you need a separate Medicare Prescription Drug Plan - Part D . You probably will . You need to be under Medicare parts A & B to qualify for a ` medi-gap ' policy . A lot of good carriers are able to sell this type of insurance in each State . Shop around .
Auto gap insurance is designed to reimburse you for the difference in the current value of the car and what you owe on the car , in the event there is a total loss . Since a car rapidly depreciates after you make the purchase , it is very possible -LRB- especially with little or no down-payment or trade-in -RRB- , that you will have this `` gap . '' Typically , the cost is not very expensive , and it can be taken out at the time you purchase the vehicle . You can also purchase a gap policy to cover your deductible , which will reduce your out-of-pocket costs . As an experienced car insurance broker , this coverage is often discussed with our customers . You can often buy coverage from your broker , lending institution or dealership .
Medigap Insurance , also called `` Medicare Supplement '' Insurance works with original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- to provide coverage for the `` gaps '' - the coinsurance and deductibles required to be paid by the Medicare beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- under original Medicare . Although Medicare represents excellent insurance coverage , these `` gaps '' can be expensive for the consumer . For example , the Part A -LRB- hospitalization -RRB- deductible for 2015 is $ 1,260 , and the Part B -LRB- doctors costs , etc. -RRB- is $ 147 plus 20 % coinsurance . A Medigap policy insures these potentially large `` gaps '' with the payment of a known monthly premium . Medigap Insurance is optional for the consumer - there is no `` requirement '' to purchase it , although it is a good idea to get some Medigap coverage if staying with original Medicare . Alternatively , Medicare beneficiaries may select a Medicare Advantage Plan . Although there are costs and limitations in Medicare Advantage Plans , a beneficiary does not need , nor can they purchase Medigap Insurance under a Medicare Advantage Plan .
There is no single `` best '' Medicare gap insurance plan . If you find a plan that covers everything you need , and it is affordable , then that is the best plan for you . Medicare gap insurance rates vary significantly by zip code , age , tobacco use and plan . Tobacco use often adds 20 % to the rate but can be more , depending on the carrier . The most popular Medicae gap insurance plan is Plan F . It is also the most expensive . There is no reason to pay more for the same plan . When you do so you are simply throwing your money away . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
To determine if a Medi-Gap policy is worth the cost to you , you might want to look back at the last couple years and add up you total co-pays and deductibles that you paid . Medi-gap policies are designed to cover those costs for you , so if you paid more in deductibles and co pays last year than the premiums will be for the Medi-gap , it 's probably worth it !
Medigap plans cover the gaps in cost that Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- does not cover . Medicare Part A & Part B only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap Plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- all or a portion of that other 20 % , depending on which Medigap plan you have -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it limits the expenses a senior can be exposed to by creating a very predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! The reason they are needed is because there is a big gap between what Medicare pays for , and what you get billed for . The difference is almost a fifth of the total cost , and we all know that can add up quickly . The medigap plans help cover some of that gap , and often for services that medicare wont . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
If you have a new enough vehicle to qualify for gap insurance , it is absolutely worth it ! In the event of a total loss , it protects your vehicle from depreciation . It is very easy to become upside on an auto loan on a newer car -LRB- meaning the vehicle is worth less than what the loan amount is -RRB- . Gap insurance is inexpensive and a great thing to have for newer vehicles that qualify .
No , there is nothing illegal about being covered under more than one health insurance policy . And , technically , as long as you were n't double dipping for premium tax subsidies on the government marketplace there is no prohibition on an individual buying more than one health insurance policy . This question most commonly comes up in the context of employer based health insurance plans though . What would be illegal would be trying to make a profit from having multiple health insurance policies . When you complete an application you are supposed to report at time of application or when any subsequent change occurs if you will be covered by other health insurance while you have this policy in effect . This is so the insurance policies can comply with and coordinate the payment status of the claim . In no case should your combined health insurance payouts exceed your paid health claims and thy willoften still be below the total depending upon factors such as state , plan designs , network usage , etc. . It rarely makes financial sense to consider paying for double coverage in health insurance . Maybe if your spouse worked at one of those rare companies that pays 100 % of the Family rate and you work for a company that pays all or most of your employee only cost , then , maybe it makes some sense . If you are concerned about the high deductibles , out-of-pocket maximums and network issues associated with many of todays new health plan designs it would be cheaper to look into supplemental coverage to fill in the gaps than to pay for a second health insurance product that would rarely pay out much in claims .
Medicare Prescription Drug Plans -LRB- also known as PDP or Part D -RRB- offer various levels of coverage before and after your deductible is met . While coverage varies from policy to policy , with most plans , afteryou and your plan have spent $ 2,850 on covered medications the combined amount plus your deductible -RRB- , you fall in to the coverage gap , or donut hole . This means there 's a temporary limit on what the drug plan will cover for drugs.Not everyone will enter the coverage gap , but for those that do , you will pay 47.5 % of the plan 's cost for brand-named drugs , and 28 % of the cost for generic drugs .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Have More Than One Beneficiary ?
Yes you can have more than one beneficiary on a life policy there are usually three on the application you also can do an attachment be careful at this because it 's not good to spread things to thin so you should think about a will or living trust at this point this could cause family strife in case of death and that is the last thing we would want to see . Seek a financial planner it will be well worth the time spent . See my profile if you should need help .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
Certainly life insurance policies allow for more than one beneficiary . Here is the thing to keep in mind , almost all life insurance companies deal in percentages versus amounts . For example if you have three beneficiaries you can not leave equal amounts . The percentages would be 33.3333 % . You would have to make one of the three 34 % and the other two beneficiaries as 33 % .
That is a great question ! There is no limit upon who or how many beneficiaries that you would like to have on your policy . The only stipulation in many cases is that they not be minors . If that is the case for you , then be sure that there is a legal guardian named , or a trust set up for them , until such time as they are legally able to access the funds . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Of course ! You have the option to put on primary beneficiaries , contingent beneficiaries -LRB- in case the primary predeceases the insured -RRB- , and even tertiary beneficiaries if you 'd like -LRB- in case the primary and contingent beneficiaries predecease the insured -RRB- . Each level -LRB- primary , contingent , and tertiary -RRB- can have more than one beneficiary . You also want to make sure to designate what happens to a beneficiary 's share if he/she predeceases the insured -LRB- especially if there is more than 1 beneficiary - e.g. does it go to the other beneficiary ? to the estate ? to someone else ? etc. -RRB- The other thing you want to make sure of is that the policy structure does not violate the `` Goodman Triangle '' -LRB- named after a court case -RRB- . The Goodman Triangle , in short , states that 2 of the 3 parties of a life insurance contract must be the same to avoid certain tax consequences -LRB- same owner and beneficiary with a different insured or same owner and insured with a different beneficiary -RRB- . If you want to place more than one beneficiary on the policy , the owner and insured would have to be the same person to not violate the Goodman Triangle . When the Goodman Triangle is violated , the situation can result in the monies being subject to estate taxes or gift tax consequences . If a policy is owned by a trust such as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , the insured and beneficiary will be the trust and the insured will be the person who 's life the trust was created for . The trust would illustrate all of the payout structure scenarios when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
The beneficiary on a life insurance policy can be almost any arrangement of people . Whoever the owner wants to receive benefits can be the beneficiary . When the beneficiary is going to be particularly complex it is probably best to have a trust drawn up by an attorney to clearly identify the disposition of the money .
Absolutely . It is not at all uncommon for a person who takes out a life insurance policy to name multiple beneficiaries on the policy and to apportion what amount or percentage of the life insurance proceeds should go to each beneficiary . It is also common to have what are referred to as primary and contingent beneficiaries named on the policy . This is to address the possible situation where the primarybeneficiary named at the time the policy is issued passes away before or at the same time as the policy holder -LRB- think of a husband and wife being killed at the same time in a car accident for instance -RRB- . In this situation , if the policy holder received good advice from their insurance agent then the policy proceed would be paid to the contingent beneficiary rather than possibly getting tied up in the probate process in dealing with the deceased person 's estate .
Of course ! You have the option to put on primary beneficiaries , contingent beneficiaries -LRB- in case the primary predeceases the insured -RRB- , and even tertiary beneficiaries if you 'd like -LRB- in case the primary and contingent beneficiaries predecease the insured -RRB- . Each level -LRB- primary , contingent , and tertiary -RRB- can have more than one beneficiary . You also want to make sure to designate what happens to a beneficiary 's share if he/she predeceases the insured -LRB- especially if there is more than 1 beneficiary - e.g. does it go to the other beneficiary ? to the estate ? to someone else ? etc. -RRB- The other thing you want to make sure of is that the policy structure does not violate the `` Goodman Triangle '' -LRB- named after a court case -RRB- . The Goodman Triangle , in short , states that 2 of the 3 parties of a life insurance contract must be the same to avoid certain tax consequences -LRB- same owner and beneficiary with a different insured or same owner and insured with a different beneficiary -RRB- . If you want to place more than one beneficiary on the policy , the owner and insured would have to be the same person to not violate the Goodman Triangle . When the Goodman Triangle is violated , the situation can result in the monies being subject to estate taxes or gift tax consequences . If a policy is owned by a trust such as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , the insured and beneficiary will be the trust and the insured will be the person who 's life the trust was created for . The trust would illustrate all of the payout structure scenarios when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
The Primary Beneficiary of a life insurance policy is the person first designated by the Owner of the policy to receive the death benefit if the Insured person passes . The Primary Beneficiary may be one or more persons , or it may be a trust or other entity . If the Primary Beneficiary is one person , he/she gets 100 % of the death benefit . If more than one beneficiary is noted , the death benefit may be split equally , or the policy may assign different percentages to go to each beneficiary . Most policies list a Contingent Beneficiary -LRB- or more than one , as described above -RRB- as well . If all the Primary Beneficiaries are deceased , the death benefit would go to the Contingent Beneficiaries in the manner noted by the policy . It is important to review life insurance policies regularly to make sure that the beneficiaries noted are up to date and that the death benefit goes to the person or persons intended .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
A secondary beneficiary for life insurance is also called a contingent beneficiary . A secondary beneficiary is not the same as being the second primary beneficiary listed . If there is more than one primary beneficiary , the death benefit is split among the primary beneficiaries . A secondary , or contingent , beneficiary only receives the death benefit if all primary beneficiaries are deceased .
A life insurance policy or an annuity will allow you to have multiple beneficiaries , which you can change when and if you need to -LRB- death of a beneficiary , divorce and so on -RRB- . You should always have more than one beneficiary . Sometimes though it may be hard to think of more than 1 beneficiary , so the answer to the your question of who would get the proceeds of your life policy if the beneficiary is dead and you pass away is , your estate . Your estate consists of all of the property and savings you own and will be dispersed according to your will . If you have no will then the Probate Court can decide who of your relatives will receive your estate .
It would be pointless to have more than one life insurance policy if the beneficiaries could only claim on one . So yes , as Peggy said above here a beneficiary may file claims on as many policies they are named as beneficiary on . Now if you are the owner of multiple `` cash value '' policies such as Whole Life or Universal Life and there is cash value accumulated in them , you may also take loans or surrender value from as many as you own and have cash values in . Life insurance is a vehicle for benefits . It 's kind of like having more than one car or truck . If they 're yours you can drive whichever one you want .
To be the beneficiary of a life insurance policy means that you would receive the life insurance proceeds if the insured person passed away . Primary beneficiaries are the person or persons who are `` first in line '' for the death benefit . The policy owner picks the beneficiaries , and if there are more than one , the policy owner determines what percent goes to each person . If there are two primary beneficiaries and one dies before the insured person dies , the other primary beneficiary gets the entire death benefit . Contingent beneficiaries can be named in case none of the primary beneficiaries are longer alive when the insured person passes .
The beneficiaries of a life insurance policy pay in a certain order . First is the primary beneficiary which can be a person , a few people paid by percentage , or an institution , such as to repay a loan . Second is the contingent beneficiary . The contingent beneficiary is paid if the primary benefit dies before or with the insured . Third is the tertiary beneficiary . This beneficiary receives life insurance proceeds if all of the primary and contingent beneficiaries die before or with the insured . If the later beneficiaries are not named on the policy , then life insurance proceeds roll into the estate and will be subject to probate and estate taxes . This is always as shame as life insurance proceeds are usually not taxed if there is a named beneficiary . Be sure and work with a knowledgeable agent or advisor to be sure your life insurance policy is set up correctly .
The primary beneficiary of life insurance is the one who would receive the money if the insured person passed away . There can be more than one primary beneficiary , with each one getting a certain percent of the death benefit . If the primary beneficiary is deceased , the money is split between the other primary beneficiaries . If there are no other primary beneficiaries , the death benefit then goes to the contingent beneficiaries .
The primary beneficiary of a life insurance policy is the one who would receive the money if the insured person passed away . There can be more than one primary beneficiary , with each one getting a certain percent of the death benefit . If the primary beneficiary is deceased , the money is split between the other primary beneficiaries . If there are no other primary beneficiaries , the death benefit then goes to the contingent beneficiaries .
The amount that someone should be paying for life insurance depends on a multitude of factors . Some of those factors are : 1 -RRB- The length of the policy . Generally speaking , the longer your premium is locked in , the higher your term life insurance premium will be . Also , permanent policies usually cost more than term policies . However , getting a new policy every 10 years can end up costing more than locking in one policy for 30 + years . So you have to look at the big picture and the purpose of your life insurance in order to determine which is more cost effective for you . 2 -RRB- Your age . Premiums go up with age . 3 -RRB- Your health and other risk factors . Having a health condition , family history of early heart disease , dangerous hobbies , and other risk factors can all affect the price of your life insurance . 4 -RRB- The type of policy you get . If you want to build up cash value in your policy -LRB- such as Whole Life or Indexed Universal Life -RRB- it will cost more than a Term policy that has no cash value . However , even policies of exactly the same type will vary in price depending on the carrier you buy them from or whether or not you get an exam -LRB- generally , but not always , No Exam policies cost more than those requiring full medical underwriting -RRB- . It is important to shop with an ethical broker who can find you the lowest price but also the type of policy that works best for your needs . 5 -RRB- Your financial situation . Persons with higher incomes and estate values may want to spend more on their life insurance coverage than those struggling to have a good quality of life on a low income . Insurance calculators can help you determine how much insurance you need , which will in turn help you arrive at an affordable price
The definition of contingent is `` dependent for existence on something not yet certain '' . In life insurance terms , it means that the contingent beneficiary exists just in case the primary beneficiary -LRB- or all the primary beneficiaries , if there are more than one -RRB- are not alive when the insured person dies . If the owner is someone different than the insured , one could set a contingent owner of the policy , as well . Life insurance is to protect survivors from the `` what if 's '' in life , and thus it is a good idea to name a contingent beneficiary for the same reason .
The annuity application has three possible persons involved : The policy owner , annuitant and beneficiary . The beneficiary can be more than one and can also select a contingent beneficiary if the primary beneficiary is no longer alive . The policy owner can also change the primary and/or the contingent policy beneficiary .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is Non Qualified Retirement Plan ?
Non-Qualified Retirement Plans are generally funded with annuities and/or life insurance . The contributions are not tax deductible , but both products accumulate tax deferred . If designed as a TAMRA compliant non modified endowment contract , life insurance can potentially generate tax free income as long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
Non-qualified retirement plans are not sanctioned for the tax deduction like qualified plans are under ERISA . Non-qualified retirement plans generally use annuities and life insurance . Annuities can be used in qualified plans , but life insurance can not . Non-qualified and qualified retirement plans using annuities , for an example , accumulate tax deferred , but the basis of a non-qualified annuity is distributed free of taxation , whereas qualified annuities are fully taxable including basis .
Selecting the best retirement plan is determined by your personal financial profile . First consideration is whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified . If your tax bracket is high and/or your employer matches some of your contributions , a qualified plan should be considered . If your tax bracket is low and your employment doesnt offer a match then non-qualified plan should be considered . Once you establish whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified , then funding your retirement with the proper product is next . To do this you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Non-Qualified is a term generally used for non ERISA retirement plans or qualified plans . A life insurance company does n't manufacture qualified products . Annuities , like life insurance , start out as non-qualified product lines not under the jurisdiction of ERISA . Non-qualified annuity payouts distribute basis tax free , whereas qualified annuity payouts are all taxable , even basis .
Supplemental executive retirement plans normally take the form of non-qualified deferred compensation arrangements . The so-called `` golden handcuffs '' mean the promise to pay comes with a substantial risk of forfeiture . Non-qualified retirement plans do not meet the same criteria as qualified plans . These non-qualified plans may include payouts in company stock or benefits funded by life insurance .
First consideration is whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified . If your tax bracket is high and/or your employer matches some of your contributions , a qualified plan should be considered . If your tax bracket is low and your employment does n't offer a match then non-qualified plan should be considered . Once you establish whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified , then funding your retirement with the proper product is next . To do this you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review .
The first step in product selection of an annuity is establishing your risk tolerance profile and purchasing product accordingly . The second , specific to this question , is should the retirement account be qualified or a non-qualified retirement account . And lastly , how many years until you retire ? The younger you are the more time you have and may be able to take on risk . The answers to these questions will determine whether you select annuities with fixed interest rates , indexed rates or separate sub accounts using equities and/or bond instruments . If your effective tax liability is low , consider non-qualified retirement plan . If youre effective tax liability is high , consider a qualified retirement plan , especial if your employer matched the contributions .
Borrowing money from your retirement plan for emergencies can be helpful , but it shouldnt be used as a bank . Qualified retirement plans have their own regulatory rules of engagement for accessing plan participant money . Qualified plans charge interest , generally require repayment at employment termination or transfer of funds . If qualified pan money is deemed received it will trigger an ordinary income tax event and a 10 % penalty if youre under 59 . Non-qualified retirement plans that use a TAMRA compliant non modified endowment contract can borrow accumulated cash values at a low or no interest as the long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
There are two options you should consider : whether the retirement plan should be qualified or non qualified . Qualified retirement plans to review may be employer sponsored 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s or SEP IRAs or a Roth IRA or traditional IRA for individuals . Non-qualified retirement plans may use tax deferred annuities or life insurance . In unique circumstances , you can combine some of these plans together .
There are two types of tax deferred retirement plans : qualified and non-qualified . Qualified plans that can accumulate tax deferred like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- s are under ERISA , The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . Non-qualified retirement plans that use life insurance and annuities accumulate tax deferred as well .
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
It depends what type of Annuity it is and if the Annuity is in a Qualified Retirement Account or not . If it is in a Qualified account , like an IRA/401k/SEP , then any distribution is 100 % taxable . If it is a non-qualified account , then only withdrawals of the gain are taxed -LRB- as income -RRB- . But since Annuities use LIFO , the gain will be the first part of the Annuity that is distributed . The growth of a non-qualified Fixed Annuity is tax deferred . If it is an Immediate Annuity/Lifetime Annuity , then again it depends on the tax status . For a Qualified account 100 % of the distributions/income will be taxable . For non-qualified , a portion of the payments will be tax-free and considered a `` return of basis/premium '' .
There are two types of retirement categories : ERISA sanctioned qualified plans and non ERISA , non-qualified plans . ERISA plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 412 -LRB- i -RRB- allow tax deduction able contributions , tax deferred accumulations and taxable distributions . Non ERISA non-qualified plans have no tax deductibility , but have tax deferred accumulations . The distributions depend on the product line . Annuities gains are taxed as ordinary income and TAMRA compliant permanent life insurance can generate tax free income providing the contract is just in force for the life of the inured .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
It depends on the type of plan and whether its qualified or non-qualified plan . Most qualified plans have plan provisions for participants to borrow money at a stated interest rate . Once you borrow , most plans will require you to pay off the loan before any transfers to another qualified plan . Non-qualified retirement plans that use cash value life insurance can access accumulations at a low interest rate . Keep in mind that if the policy is surrendered or lapses , the loans in excess of the original basis will be taxable . At ordinary income tax rates .
On if the Annuity is already in a Qualified Retirement Account . An IRA is a type of Qualified Retirement Account . That basically means the money in the account was contributed on a pre-taax basis . Qualified Retirement Accounts usually can be transferred from one account to another as a general rule . -LRB- there are a few exceptions to this -RRB- But if the Annuity is a non-qualified Annuity then you are not able to transfer it -LRB- it is technically a transfer not a rollover -RRB- to an IRA . And there is no need to do so . An IRA has a less favorable tax status than a non-qualified annuity . It would not be a benefit to transfer it to an IRA .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Choosing the retirement plan for yourself can be a daunting task , but here are a few factors that may assist you in your decision . First should you use a qualified or no qualified plans?Second , should you use your employer sponsored or individual retirement plan?If you are ina high tax bracket and your employer offers matching contributions , you should select a qualified employer sponsored retirement plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . But if your tax bracket is minimal and you like more flexibility that a regulated qualified plan , a non qualified plan using indexed life insurance may be appropriate for you . These are just a couple of considerations to get you started .
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities can be individually owned , jointly owned and owned by a qualified individual retirement account or employer sponsored qualified retirement account . In the case of a qualified individual retirement account or employer sponsored qualified retirement account , the ownership is individual , but for annuitization purposes can be joint annuitants .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Is Universal Life Insurance For ?
Universal Life insurance works well for people who want lifelong coverage at the lowest possible price . GUL -LRB- Guaranteed Universal Life -RRB- can be guaranteed not to lapse to age 120 + at a level premium . Because GUL has very low cash value , the premium can be kept relatively low for permanent coverage . Indexed Universal Life is a good product for those who want a safe way to save up money for retirement income . Unlike GUL , IUL is used to create large amounts of cash value that can be borrowed tax deferred during retirement . So Universal Life really can work for almost anyone . It is flexible and can be adapted for a lifetime .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
Universal Life Insurance is good for persons who are looking for a low cost permanent policy that does not accumulate cash value . That is called guaranteed universal life . On the other hand , universal life can be good for people wanting to build up an accumulation of money to `` borrow from themselves '' on a tax favorable basis in retirement . That is called indexed universal life or variable universal life . Universal life is flexible , so is also good for people who want one policy to simply adjust during their lifetime .
Universal Life Insurance comes in several different types , and who the policy benefits depends on what type of Universal Life policy you get . Guaranteed no lapse UL usually has the lowest premiums of any permanent policy . That type of Universal Life benefits those with low incomes who still want the protection of lifelong coverage . Indexed Universal Life and Variable UL can be designed to provide tax deferred retirement income , or to borrow from for other needs . Universal Life , in general , is very flexible , so is ideal for a family who wants to simply adjust one policy throughout the stages of their life , rather than buy a new term or whole life policy whenever the need arises .
There are two types of life insurance : Term and Permanent life insurance . Term life insurance is for a time certain period of coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries from financial liability . Permanent life insurance is for ongoing financial liabilities that may never terminate . Depending upon your age term life insurance issues at guaranteed periods of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurances can mature up to age 121 and some polices actually isle the life of the insured . Permanent life insurance can be classified into two categories : Par whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life has four policy platforms : Guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
Medical care has a price . In the open market it is fixed by consumers who want a service and medical personnel who can deliver the service . The problem occurs when someone needs the treatment but can not or will not pay the price for the service . I say , Will not because every decision about spending is discretionary . Should society as a whole bear the responsibility for the medical care for every resident ? Should the nature of that care be regulated ? Should the source of funding be general ? Those are the most pressing questions when considering a universal health care system . Ultimately in a universal health care system there is a specified list of services and a funding mechanism that is not based upon need for medical services . You may need a procedure that isnt covered in the program . At the same time you might consider another procedure immoral or frivolous . Who is going to decide ? The idea of universal health care sounds very good until you understand that some medical services will probably not be covered . In the USSR dental hygiene consisted of inserting a fluorescent tube into the patients mouth and surgery was routinely conducted in a super-cold environment because anesthesia was not readily available . In that case , most Americans would consider the health care to be inadequate . However , it was available to all and at little or no direct cost to the consumer . Under most regimes universal health care becomes rationed health care . The best example is the army under war time conditions . It is called triage but it means that you treat those with the greatest likelihood of recovery before treating soldiers with graver injuries . While it might be the best utilization of manpower , the soldier with his leg blown off , might not like the wait and a narcotic shot is not going to make his family happy . The issue of who is going to pay for the universal health care system is the most sensitive . No one wants to see others in need . By the same token no one wants to pay the high bill for medical treatment . If the universal care is funded by general funds from taxes it will always be a political football . If it is paid by premiums paid by individuals there will always be a need to assist those unable to pay the premium . The problem really boils down to our expectations of treatment level , the availability and cost of that treatment and who is going to pay the price . Yes , it sounds like a great idea but it has many difficulties and when it is expected then the society will start to question the need for universal flat screen TVs , micro-wave ovens and wall-to-wall carpets . There really isnt an end unless you look at the Soviet Union and see how it ended .
While both universal life and whole life insurance are permanent products and have a death benefit the similarities end there . Whole life insurance has a guarantee premium for the life of the contract and generally is credited by a dividend or return of unused premium . Universal life gas four policy types : current assumption universal life , guaranteed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . With the exception of guaranteed universal life , the others have flexible premiums or death benefit that can be changed by the policy owner .
Life Insurance is a mortality product constructed to cover temporary -LRB- term insurance -RRB- or permanent -LRB- permanent insurance -RRB- financial liabilities . Is your financial liability temporary or perpetual ? Term life insurance is generally offered in increments of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life polices can cover you to age 121 and has five policy types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . There are three major planning categories for life insurance : indemnification , income and inheritance . First , determine which planning category you need . If the planning category is indemnification and/or inheritance then determine is the need temporary or permanent ? The solution is either term or guaranteed universal life insurance . If the planning category is income , life insurance can be a supplemental retirement alternative . Here 's some product alternatives : current assumption universal life insurance with three crediting methods : interest rates , indices and separate sub account performance using the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option . For income , you may also want to look at TAMRA compliant lowest death benefit , participating whole life , with a max term rider and a paid up additions rider .
The only type of life insurance that you can borrow from is Universal Life or Whole Life . You can not borrow from Term Life . There are many types of Universal Life and Whole Life , and especially with Universal Life , some policies will have very little cash value . If you are purchasing a Universal Life policy for the purpose of borrowing from it , you will do best with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life .
It depends on the insurer as to what Adjustable Life is . There were a couple of midwestern companies who had products with that moniker which were fixed premium adjustable life insurance products . Universal Life one of the dominant forms of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life which is the official name of the product . So , it may be that you are asking about Universal Life . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
The first consideration in purchasing a life insurance policy is to determine what planning goal you are attempting to achieve : indemnification , income or inheritance . Indemnification can be temporary or permanent . If the economic liability is temporary then term life insurance which -LRB- depending upon your age -RRB- can be purchased up to 30 years . If the economic liability is permanent then guaranteed universal life can be purchased to age 121 . Income and inheritance planning goals require permanent life insurance policies . Income goals with life insurance are generally considered because of the tax advantages and crediting method options : For market risk investing , variable universal life insurance . For domestic and foreign indice investing , indexed universal life . For interest rate investing , current assumption universal life insurance or participating whole life insurance . For inheritance , guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- insurance for singles and GUL survivorship for couples .
Universal Life insurance works well for people who want lifelong coverage at the lowest possible price . GUL -LRB- Guaranteed Universal Life -RRB- can be guaranteed not to lapse to age 120 + at a level premium . Because GUL has very low cash value , the premium can be kept relatively low for permanent coverage . Indexed Universal Life is a good product for those who want a safe way to save up money for retirement income . Unlike GUL , IUL is used to create large amounts of cash value that can be borrowed tax deferred during retirement . So Universal Life really can work for almost anyone . It is flexible and can be adapted for a lifetime .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Determining the right life insurance policy to purchase is a product suitability question . Life insurance has two options : term and permanent . If your financial liabilities , future obligations and charitable intent are temporary , then buy term life insurance . But if theyre permanent buy permanent life insurance . But the total amount of these items can determine your amount of coverage . Term life insurance is generally offered in five year increments like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurance can cover you to age 121 . Permanent life insurance is offered in five types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Youll need to determine your planning model for life insurance . Is it for protection , tax advantages income or next generation use ? And in addition is your risk tolerance .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Insulin Pump Supplies ?
Yes , Medicare does cover insulin pump supplies under Medicare Part B . If the Medicare patient uses syringes or pen for diabetes , rather than a pump , those supplies are not covered by Part B but are covered by Part D . The diabetic person using the insulin pump must have type 1 diabetes , or hard to control type 2 or gestational diabetes .
Yes , Medicare does cover insulin pump supplies under Medicare Part B . If the Medicare patient uses syringes or pen for diabetes , rather than a pump , those supplies are not covered by Part B but are covered by Part D . The diabetic person using the insulin pump must have type 1 diabetes , or hard to control type 2 or gestational diabetes .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare is concerned about diabetes type II and includes coverage for many diabetes testing equipment and supplies . Your doctor must prescribe your diabetic supplies . Some of the Medicare Part B covered items include testing strips , glucose meters , lancets and insulin but ONLY IF it is used in a pump . Levemir flexpen 's are part of Medicare Part D . If your drug plan includes the flexpen under the formulary some of the cost may be reimbursed .
Insulin is covered by Medicare Part B if the insulin is administered by insulin pump , but not if it is injected by a syringe or pen . However , Medicare Part D drug plans cover insulin regardless of how the insulin is injected into the body . For a person to be able to be covered for insulin pump , they must have type 1 diabetes , or have hard to control type 2 or gestational diabetes .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
No , Medicare does not cover the Omnipod insulin pump . It does cover the minimed insulin pump . Many who have had good results with the Omnipod pump have had to switch to another insulin system when they went on Medicare in order to have this part of their health care covered by insurance .
Medicare Part D does cover some diabetic supplies . Part D will cover supplies that are used for administration of insulin -LRB- syringes , needles , alcohol swabs , gauze and inhaled insulin devices -RRB- . Medicare Part B covers diabetic supplies such as blood glucose monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets .
Diabetes Supplies & Services Supplies : Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- covers some diabetes supplies , including : Blood sugar -LRB- glucose -RRB- test strips Blood sugar testing monitors Insulin Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions Therapeutic shoes or inserts Part B covers some diabetes services , including : Diabetes self-management training Yearly eye exam Foot exam Glaucoma tests Nutrition therapy services -LRB- medical -RRB-
Yes , Medicare will pay for an insulin pump under Medicare Part B as `` durable medical equipment '' if is prescribed as medically necessary by a Medicare participating doctor , and is purchased through an approved Medicare provider . Those who are eligible will have type 1 diabetes , or type 2 diabetes that is difficult to control , or gestational diabetes that is difficult to control .
Medicare Part B covers some diabetic supplies , including blood glucose testing monitors , blood glucose test strips , lancets , lancet devices , and glucose control solutions . People with diabetes may receive shoe inserts to prevent foot sores , and some may even receive therapeutic shoes . Medicare Part D covers syringes and other supplies associated with the administration of insulin .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . Consult with an experienced Medigap broker to see which plan would be most suitable for your specific needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . Medicare covers a lot of parts to diabetic care , but some of it will have to be covered by other means . For specific diabetic benefits , your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- will cover certain testing supplies and services including blood sugar testing monitors and testing strips , lancet devices and lancets , and glucose control solutions . These items are considered durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- and would be covered under Part B. Prescriptions such as insulin and metformin -LRB- common treatment medicines for diabetes -RRB- would be covered under a Part D prescription drug plan - Part B would not provide coverage for these types of diabetic care items . Original Medicare only covers 80 % of the expenses so you may want to consider adding a Medigap plan to cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . Consult with an experienced broker who can review your specific medical history and help you determine the best course of action for your needs . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
`` Original '' Medicare will cover SOME medications under Part B . As a general rule , infusion therapy , immunizations administered in your doctor 's office and most diabetic supplies -LRB- including insulin -RRB- may be covered under Part B. Most prescriptions filled on an outpatient basis by mail order or at a retail pharmacy are covered under Medicare Part D. Your Part D prescription drug plan is a separate benefit offered by private insurance carriers . The premium you pay will vary by zip code and the covered medications . Many Part D plans have an annual deductible that must be satisfied before brand name prescriptions are included with copay 's . Be sure to verify that the medications you take are included in your Part D drug formulary You can compare drug formulary 's at Medicare.gov by using the drug formulary prescription plan finder .
Prior to January 1 , 2013 the most likely answer to your question would have been no . Though , in group health insurance there might have been contracts , especially for some self-insured groups , where coverage for a breast pump might have been covered . One of the earlier provisions of the Affordable Care Act does require coverage for lactation services of which a breast pump is certainly a part of and therefore is technically covered . The law however does not specify any particular types or models of breast pumps that must be covered so the consumer should be aware that availability of breast pumps and the types and models that are covered will vary from one insurance carrier to another depending upon their internal policies regarding such durable medical equipment items . I advise that you check with your insurance carrier regarding their specific benefits for this service as they will probably have preferred vendors that they will want their members to purchase or rent these devices from and they will be able to inform you as to specifically what types or models of devices your policy with them will cover . Going out and buying a breast pump and then just filing a claim with your insurance carrier might result in a denial of the claim or a reduced level of coverage if your purchase was not within their guidelines .
The Affordable Care Act requires that breast pumps be covered with no copay , but not all insurance plans are required to be compliant . Most plans require you use their provider , and only cover a specific pump . If you want a different pump , some companies will allow you to purchase a different pump if you pay the difference . You will ultimately have to check with your insurance company to see their specific coverage .
Erectile dysfunction medications such as Viagra and Cialis are not covered by Medicare -LRB- not under Medicare Part D Drug Plans or any other Medicare plan -RRB- . This coverage was discontinued by Medicare in 2006 . Medicare will cover penile vacuum pumps , or penile inflation devices if the pumps are ineffective , for some cases of erectile dysfunction .
The loss of the pump to normal wear and tear is not covered . If the pump is lost due to a covered peril such as lightning , fire , or windstorm , then it would be covered . A pump is not an excluded item under the HO-3 form of the homeowners policy which is the most common form .
Recent healthcare legislation -LRB- commonly known as Obamacare or The Affordable Care Act -RRB- has greatly increased covered preventive services . Equipment , services and counseling are often some of the newer benefits and breast-feeding seems to be heavily promoted . However , it seems as if some policies cover only basic manual pumps while other plans cover hospital-grade pumps . It 's best to ask your broker who can promptly examine your policy . Or you can contact an experienced broker who will discuss which carriers offer the best breast pump coverage in your area .
Ostomy supplies may be covered under Medicare Part B. Whether Medicare will cover the supplies or not depends on how your doctor has documented the need for such supplies . Depending on the type of ostomy you have , Medicare may cover supplies for up to 3 months at a time , assuming you have met your Part B deductible .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Change To A Different Health Insurance Plan ?
Changing to a different health insurance plan can be easy if you allow it to be . First , you should speak to an independent health insurance agent that represents most of the major carriers . They will be able to save you weeks of research and be able to show you plans from the major carriers . They can then help you figure out which plan would meet your needs the best . You can also compare health insurance plans instantly on our website . If you are looking for under age 65 health insurance click `` other '' and it will take you to that section . If you are 65 or over you can compare Medicare Supplement plans on our homepage . You can also give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- are good plans if you are in good health and not using a lot of medical services . In Alabama where I practice MA Plans have high out of pocket cost for people with serious or chronic health problems , as much as $ 6700 in a calendar year . The problem I see with MA Plans is that people start out using them when they are in good health but once your health changes and you have to use your MA Plan more and more you become unhappy with your out of pocket cost for Medicare covered services . If you become unhappy with your MA Plan and want to switch to a Medicare Supplement you may not be able to if you have serious health problems or you may pay a much higher premium because of your health . My professional recommendation is to get a Medicare Supplement even if you are in good health because you need a Medicare Health Plan that not only meets your needs today but will continue to meet your needs as you get older and your health care needs change . If you wait until you need a Medicare Supplement because your health has changed you may not be able to . Insurance companies that offer Medicare Supplement Plans can and do turn down people that have serious pre-existing health conditions .
Depending upon your point of view , one could say that virtually all major health insurance carriers are equally good or bad in today 's marketplace . The health insurance industry has been highly regulated at the state level for decades and with the Affordable Care Act we have an entirely new set of Federal regulations for health insurer 's to comply with . So , yes , CIGNA offers excellent services . So , do AETNA , Assurant , Humana , United Healthcare and scores of other options around the nation . Defining how `` good '' CIGNA is versus any of its national competitors is a subjective exercise that means different things to different people . In the new health insurance marketplace of 2014 the informed buyer will have to understand that the insurance carriers have to devise different ways of covering up to $ 6250 in potential financial exposure per person in different plan design configurations and price points . The insurance carriers has to come up with their own ideas as to how to have plan designs that fit into the new `` Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum '' allowed by the law . Right now that can translate into some very meaningful benefit plan design differences between insurance carriers and within the same `` metallic ' tier level . You may have one insurance carrier offering only high deductible plans while a competitor may offer some plans with different office visit and/or prescription copayments and yet they both fall within the range of being qualified `` Bronze or Silver '' plan designs . Upon examination they will find that the various carrier 's first attempts at plan designs have yielded results that are often confusing , inconsistent and can be make it even more difficult for the non-insurance person to see the value differences between various carrier 's plans . This is where you start to come to those intersections of Price , Benefits and Network that help drive a person 's buying decision . At certain price points and for certain of their plan design 's overall benefits , CIGNA can offer some of the best coverage for the dollar in today 's marketplace . The are a nationally recognized brand with an large , national provider network and a growing offering of value added programs designed to keep their members healthy or effectively manage the chronically ill . While no one can say that any insurance carrier is the `` best '' in each and every way and every location . CIGNA strives for a consistency across the large number of various insured populations they serve . I can feel comfortable in saying that CIGNA should be part of your consideration in the individual and large group market segments .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
In 2014 and beyond , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act , individual & fully insured small to medium sized group health insurance plans will have to fall within four categories referred to as Bronze , Silver , Gold and Platinum . These categories represent an actuarial valuation of how much financial exposure the policyholder has up to a maximum out-of-pocket financial exposure of $ 6350 . It is a gross over simplification but for the average health insurance consumer , the closest I can come to explaining these `` Metallic '' plan categories is that Bronze represents 60 % coverage , Silver equals 70 % coverage , Gold equals 80 % coverage and Platinum equals 90 % coverage . All of these plans , by law , must be guaranteed to be issued by the insurance carrier , can not be subject to underwriting and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately with no lifetime limits on coverage . In addition , all plans must cover what are referred to as the Minimum Essential Benefits . These requirements range from covering a wide range of preventive care services at 100 % , coverage for maternity , mental health & substance abuse along with a variety of other services including pediatric dental & vision to even educating women on how to nurse their babies -LRB- how the human race survived for thousands of yearswithout the government providing for such training is a mystery to me -RRB- . Unfortunately , there really are no simple andconcise ways to explain health insurance plans . Different state regulations also apply and each insurance carrier can design health insurance plans that fall within these four different `` Metallic '' categories that can vary widely in their appearance . To make an informed choice for your health insurance as an individual or a business it is more important than ever that you seek out the advice of an experienced health insurance broker/consultant who understands the intricacies of the health insurance plans options and their associated costs that are available to you in your specific area .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It is very unlikely that the ACA -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- will disappear as it is working . Will the ACA change over time ? That is a certainty because it will need to adjust to fix flaws and imperfections that were n't considered when the plan was rolled out . Basically in my 27 years in insurance , health insurance has changed every year , Obamacare is no different . It 's just a health plan , just different than before , but no so much so that it does n't fall in line with past changes in health insurance .
In my opinion , you 're asking the wrong question . If you contact ten different companies , you 'll get ten different rates for the same coverage . That does n't mean the one with the higher premium is n't as good a program . It might have the best provisions for your particular situation . Besides , every company will tell you that they have the best product . The question you should be asking is `` Do I have an agent who I trust to do the best thing for me and my family ? '' Every situation is different and a good agent will have the resources to find the best combination of programs that fits yours . It may be all whole life or no whole life or some combination of different programs . I would begin by asking questions and finding out how much you need , how long you need it for , and your budget . The program you begin with will , most likely , change as you get older and your circumstances change . Be smart and find a good agent who cares more about your family than he/she does about their next commission check . Then , listen to them , and do what they recommend . You and your family will be much better off .
You first want to research the types of benefits available under a Medigap plan , decide which of these benefits you want , and then select the Medigap policy that meets these needs . All of the Medigap plans are standardized so the benefits under a given plan is the EXACT same from every carrier . So how do they differentiate themselves in that type of marketplace ? They feature different rates , rating methods - community rated , issue age rated , and attained age rated , and value added services -LRB- e.g. UHC plan members can get discounts for vision or dental services and access to the senior sneakers program through AARP -RRB- . A lot of people think `` Why do n't I just get a plan F ? All of the benefits available are included in that plan ! '' While this is true , this plan is also going to be the most expensive . If you 're on a fixed income , you may want to try to keep your cost down . Therefore , a different plan may be more appropriate for you . For example , a plan G offers all of the same benefits as a plan F , except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 for 2014 -RRB- . However , a plan G is going to be cheaper than a plan F -LRB- and usually by a good margin -RRB- . Plan N can also reduce premiums by a substantial margin and offer great coverage as well - the difference from plans F & G being a small copay is due when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to a $ 20 copay -RRB- or the hospital -LRB- up to a $ 50 copay -RRB- and excess charges are not covered . Plan N is most useful for someone who 's doctors accept Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- when accepting assignment , a doctor accepts the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full and can not bill you an excess charge -RRB- . Another major point to keep in mind is where your health is now and where it may be in the future because you might not be able to switch to another Medigap plan later if your health drastically changed down the line , you may not be able to qualify for a new plan if medical underwriting is required . The rating method a carrier uses is an important factor to consider here . You also need to find out which carriers offer the plan in your area . Remember to keep in mind that not every carrier offers every plan . Because there are many health care plan options available to seniors , it 's most helpful for you to work with an experienced broker who can guide you through all of these steps . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To File A Health Insurance Claim ?
There are two ways to file a health insurance claim . The easiest would be to have your doctor or service providors employees file the claim directly through their office so that you do n't have to deal with it . If that 's not an option , health claim forms can always be printed off of your carriers website and completed to be submitted .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
There are 2 ways to file a claim you can contact the carrier claim number that is listed on your policy or you can contact your agent that wrote your policy . I Always instruct our clients to contact us 1st that way we can document your file and make sure that your claim has been process right away and filed correctly . having to file a claim is stressful enough a good agent should be able to guide you through the process
Claim history is a big factor for insurance companies but just because you have a claim does n't mean your rate is going to increase . Several factors are used to determine a rate including the length of time you have been with an insurance company , credit , type of claim filed , amount of claim , castropheclaimsect . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover `` sudden and accidental '' losses . It is not a maintenance policy and you do not want to file small claims . Filing frequent , small claims will cause your rateto increase or your policy may be cancelled .
If it is the Insured person and Policy Owner who has the claims against them , and they die and leave the life insurance proceeds to a beneficiary , the beneficiary does not have to pay the claims of the Insured unless they co-signed for that debt . If there is no beneficiary and the life insurance money ends up in the estate , creditor claims can be filed during probate . If it is the beneficiary who has the claims against them , it depends on the state of residence as to whether a claim can be filed against the beneficiary 's life insurance proceeds , and/or how much of the death benefit is subject to creditor claims .
In most cases , you do not need to file a claim to Medicare , as doctors/hospitals are required to file these claims for you in a timely manner for Medicare-covered services and supplies . If , however , your doctor has not filed a claim , you can contact them and ask them to do so or call Medicare at 1-800-MEDICARE . If it is close to the time limit -LRB- 12 months -RRB- and your doctor has not filed the claim , you can do so using Medicare 's Patient Request for Medicare Payment Form -LRB- CMS-1490S -RRB- . WEBSITELINK
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
Contacting your agent may not necessarily result in increased premium but reporting a claim might . Your agent is very unlikely to know how much your rates may increase if you were to file a claim . Keep this simple rule in mind : The less claims you file through insurance company the better . You are better off paying a small claim out of pocket . Let the insurance company handle your large claims . Even not at faults and comp claims will have some impact on your rates with most companies .
Immediately ! Call your agent or insurer and get started on that process . Claims can take a while to resolve or they can be resolved quickly . If you have a police report or evidence ready to go as soon as you file your claim , it can often get fixed faster . That said , you can usually submit your evidence after the initial filing . I 'm not aware of any company that wo n't let you submit evidence after filing your claim but there are a lot of companies out there . Long-short of it , file as soon as possible .
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
A fence is normally covered under a homeowners policy . Please contact your agent before filing a claim as a fence claim may not exceed your deductible and if it does there might be premium adjustments that would make filing the claim questionable . There are claims that you should not file .
It can , yes . Many companies offer a `` Claim Free '' discount if you have not filed a claim is say , 5 years . If you do suffer a loss and then have to file a claim , it is more than likely that if your company had been providing such a discount , that discount would be removed at your next renewal causing your premium to increase . Other companies may apply a surcharge based upon the type of claim you filed which would also affect your premium .
Make a claim when the recovery is more than a potential increase in subsequent premiums . Basically I advise against making petty claims that come close to the deductible on the policy . Many companies provide substantial discounts for being claims free . Loss of that discount should be computed . Other companies , however , lower the deductible for years without a claim . So you need to have a clear idea of the recovery you anticipate before filing a claim . If it is a liability claim , never hesitate to file the claim .
That is a great question ! As far as your insurance company is concerned , it will make no difference who caused the damage that resulted in your claim , the fact that they have to pay out on it is what matters . If the claim is filed listing your husband as the cause of the damage , then it is a pretty good bet that one of you will see a rate hike , if not both -LRB- if you are on separate policies - one a work vehicle , paperwork not completed , etc. -RRB- . That said , there are some things to consider . Your policy may have a `` first accident forgiveness '' clause , and assuming that this is his/your first accident -LRB- many companies now offer this -RRB- you may not have any change in your rates . Another thing to consider is whether the damage done to your car will cost less to fix than your deductible amount is . If the repairs are $ 500 and your deductible is $ 1000 , you would end up paying for the repairs yourself anyway . At that point , does it make sense to report the accident at all and risk the rate hike ? I 'd suggest that you review your policy and look for the forgiveness clause , and see if that would work for you . I 'd also get an estimate or two , and compare them to the deductible you would end up paying . If you have the forgiveness perk , and the damage is extensive , I 'd file the claim . If the damage is less than the deductible , I 'd probably skip filing the claim , and just get the damage repaired . It might work best if you contact your agent and ask them how they recommend you proceed as they would know much better your policy and driving records than I would . I hope that helps , and that you find a pleasant outcome to your unpleasant problem ! Thank you for asking !
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is Scheduled Health Insurance ?
Scheduled Health Insurance plans are not meant to replace traditional Comprehensive Health insurance plans and are more of a basic policy providing access to day-to-day health care such as going to the doctor or getting a prescription drug . They are often offered by associations that provide the plan to members of the association only . These associations must be formed for reasons other than to sell insurance . They are very limited compared to a comprehensive health plan and are not meant to cover catastrophic events . Although these plans cost less than a comprehensive plan , they are limited and pay benefits directly to their providers based on the `` schedule of benefits '' outlined in the plan . Resources : WealthAcademyPh.com Wikipedia
The MPFS or Medicare Physician Fee Schedule is provided by CMS . There are a couple ways to access MPFS . Visit www.cms.gov and choose the tab that says MEDICARE . The next step is to select Physician Fee Schedule . On the Physician Fee Schedule page , the first item in the left margin is the Physician Fee Schedule Look-Up Tool . Select the Physcian Fee Schedule Look-Up Tool and it will display directions on how to use the searchable database . The Look-Up Tool allows you to search payment amounts , RVUs -LRB- relative value units -RRB- , and procedure codes . You can also view the national payment amount , the payment amount for a specific Carrier , or the payment amount in a specific location . The published Physician Fee Schedule Look-Up Tool is updated quarterly and provides information on more than 10,000 physician and non-physician practitioner services .
The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan instituted by your employer . The documents describing the plan are available from the employer . If the employer is contributing to the plan that portion is normally subject to a vesting schedule . There are prescribed ways of implementing the vesting schedule but the employer is the one that selects the schedule used in your company . The vesting schedule shows you the relationship between years in the plan and the percentage of the employers contributions that are available to you . The schedule calls for 100 % vesting at some point .
Usually , but in a fairly limited way . If there is coverage , it will be for the named perils listed in the policy AND subject to your Homeowners ' Deductible . The coverage may also be limited to a specific dollar amount per piece . If you do have jewelry or other higher value items that you are concerned about , it is best to talk to you insurance professional about `` scheduling '' those items for coverage either on a homeowners ' `` rider '' or as a separate policy all together . There are a couple of advantages to this . First , the item will be covered to it 's appraised value as opposed to some significantly smaller amount . Second , when scheduled these items are usually then NOT subject to the homeowners ' deductible . Finally , in addition to the perils listed in the Homeowners policy , scheduled items are also covered for `` mysterious dissappearance '' which is much broader coverage . This means that there would be coverage even if the item was simply lost . If your diamond falls out of your engagement ring and the ring is scheduled , there would be coverage to replace the stone . There would be no such coverage under a standard Homeowners ' policy .
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
Most home policies will cover the loss but if it is of a higher value and you did not schedule it then it is possible that you will not get all of what it is worth that is why it is so important to discuss with an agent about what you have and what needs to be protected in theevent of a loss is tragic enough but then to find out later that you were not covered properly is even worse . Anything of a significant value should be scheduled in
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
How to schedule a life insurance exam ? This is a pretty common question I run across . People think they have to schedule an appointment with their doctor for a life exam . Actually , when you apply for life insurance a 3rd party examination company will contact you to schedule an appointment at home or work to meet and do your medical history questions and blood/urine draws and a few other things depending on age and face amount .
If the jewelry is a scheduled item it would cover it in most cases . Scheduling an item means that it is specifically listed on the policy for an appraised amount . If you own expensive items it is always best to get them appraised and scheduled . Jewelry is covered under a homeowners policy for specific perils , but only up to an aggregate limit . Check with your agent and have him review your coverage with you .
Typically if you have your firearms scheduled -LRB- individually listed and paying additional premium -RRB- yourdeductiblewill not apply . Otherwise -LRB- if not scheduled -RRB- your firearms areusuallycovered under your standard personal property coverage , and yourdeduciblewill apply . This way there is typically a per item cap . So lets say the per item cap is $ 1,500 , and you have a firearm of $ 2,000 stollen from your home , you would only have $ 1,500 of coverage minus your deducible . Some insurance company do ask if you own any firearms such as Electric Insurance Company -LRB- owned by G.E. -RRB- . The answer to this question my exclude coverage if not scheduled .
Scheduled Health Insurance plans are not meant to replace traditional Comprehensive Health insurance plans and are more of a basic policy providing access to day-to-day health care such as going to the doctor or getting a prescription drug . They are often offered by associations that provide the plan to members of the association only . These associations must be formed for reasons other than to sell insurance . They are very limited compared to a comprehensive health plan and are not meant to cover catastrophic events . Although these plans cost less than a comprehensive plan , they are limited and pay benefits directly to their providers based on the `` schedule of benefits '' outlined in the plan . Resources : WealthAcademyPh.com Wikipedia
Paid up life-insurance means you dont make anymore payments on the policy . You still get the coverage , but you no longer have to pay for it . But heres the question : suppose you wanted to keep paying ? Why wouldnt the insurance company allow you to do so ? I mean , some of these permanent insurance policies can get very cash rich . Whole life policies can pay some pretty hefty dividends . Universal life policies can apply a pretty decent interest rate . As I am sure you have heard , there can be some great tax advantages to accumulating wealth inside life insurance : tax-deferred accumulation , and , under the right circumstances , tax-free distributions . So why wouldnt an insurance company just let you go for it ? A number of decades ago , they did . People were taking out policies with face amounts of $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 , but putting huge amounts of cash into them . Huge amounts . They really milked the tax advantages of the product . Of course , the IRS got wise to this and imposed certain rules . These rules limit the amount of money that can grow inside these policies and still avoid taxation . You can exceed this limit , but then you get a tax bill . From this point of view , paid up means if you put more cash into the policy , you could create a taxable event . It also means something else , in consideration of the expenses of the policy . Lets say you take out a universal life product with a guarantee to age 100 . This means that given the proper payment schedule , both the premium and the death benefit will be guaranteed to a age 100 . The emphasis is on the payment schedule . If you meet it , then no more payments would be required to secure those guarantees . It would be paid up . Whats interesting here is that , depending on the product , a lot of flexibility exists for designing a payment schedule . You can have continuous pay and simply pay the lowest amount required annually . You could have a single pay in which just one payment in the first year will get you what you want . You could have a 10 pay , which means you just pay for 10 years - and still get the guarantees . You could have 20 pay . And so on . Depending on your cash flow and other factors , you could pay up your policy with any number of strategies . And then you simply would not have to worry about paying for your life insurance , even though you would have the coverage for as long as you need . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
What does it mean to become fully vested in a retirement plan ? What it pertains to is the percentage an employee gets from employer contributions to their retirement plan . Fully vested means that the employee now `` owns '' 100 % of his/hers employer contributions to their retirement plans . The most common vesting schedule is a 5 year schedule that begins with 20 % and finishes at 100 % . Once at 100 % with no breaks in service you stay at 100 % . If an employee were to separate service after a year , they would take 100 % of their contributions and only 20 % of any employer matching .
Withdrawing money from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- can be quite complicated and could be quite expensive . Since your employer has established the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the plan documents that govern your plan are in his office . The first thing to find out is whether in service withdrawals are allowed by the plan . Often there will be allowed withdrawals but the withdrawal must meet certain conditions . It is important to determine if you have the right to withdraw money from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- if you are still an employee . The rules also change if you leave your employer , whether voluntarily or involuntarily . You will probably find that your access to the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is much greater if you have left your job . If your employer is contributing to your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- there is probably a vesting schedule that is a part of the plan documents . The vesting schedule tells you the percentage of the employers contribution that is actually yours . Normally these vesting schedules run out several years so money that is received by the account may not actually be yours for a number of years . Your deposits will remain yours . These are the employers contributions that have a vesting schedule . If the money in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- has been deferred from current income tax you will be responsible to pay income tax as ordinary income in the year that you receive the money . If the money is in a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the withdrawal will be treated as a return of your contribution until you exhaust you basis -LRB- the total amount that you contributed . -RRB- The next major issue is your age . The rules vary a great deal if you are younger than fifty-nine and a half years old . If money can be withdrawn from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and you are younger than fifty-nine and a half years old you will be subject . Generally speaking withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- prior to age fifty-nine and a half are also treated to a special penalty tax of ten per cent . This is changed in addition to the ordinary income tax on the distribution . You can not avoid paying income tax on the money received but there are ways to avoid paying the ten per cent penalty tax . There are several general reasons . The first reason is if the amount is being withdrawn because the participant has died . A beneficiary will receive all of the distributions of the inherited 401 -LRB- k -RRB- free of the penalty tax . This can become complicated if the beneficiary is a spouse , please see a retirement income adviser or competent tax advisor prior to finalizing a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to a spouse . Another circumstance under which money can be taken from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- without paying the penalty tax is if the money is need due to the disability of the participant . This can also be true if money is needed to pay deductible medial expense . There is also a method of withdrawing money that can avoid the penalty tax . This can be quite complicated but the gist is to take the money in substantially equal period payments . If you think about a retirement annuity you will understand this concept . The payments should be designed to cover the lifetime of the participant . It is necessary for the participant to leave employment to use this technique . The computations for these payments are complicated but there are advisors who can help you should this be necessary . It is important to note that the penalty tax is only applicable until you reach age fifty-nine and half and the payments under this plan do not need to be continued after that point . Other retirement programs have additional exceptions that are more liberal than a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- IRAs , SEPs and SIMPLEs allow a $ 10,000 exemption to first-time homebuyers -LRB- this means anyone who is purchasing a home and hasnt owned a home for two years . -RRB- These plays also provide exceptions for higher education expenses -LRB- these must be taken in the year they are incurred , not the year that they are paid . -RRB- These plans offer exceptions for health insurance premiums for the unemployed . There is also a special rule for participants who are separating from their company and are more than fifty-five years old . There are ways to avoid the penalty tax but this requires careful tax planning .
What is retirement plan vesting ? Vesting applies to some qualified plans where an employee earns a greater percentage of the employer contribution to their `` name '' as time passes while they work for the employer . The idea behind a vesting schedule is to reward the employee for sticking around by making more and more of the employer contributions the employees . A usual vesting schedule runs five years . Starting with a 20 % vested in the first year moving to 100 % vested by the fifth year .
Medicare Part B schedule is the amount Medicare will pay a provider for a covered procedure . For example , a certain surgery may cost $ 1000 but Medicare will only approve $ 500 on that particular surgery . You are responsible for 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , Medicare pays 80 % . You will receive an explanation of benefits from Medicare showing the approved amount and what your responsibility would be , based upon the fee schedule .
The basic answer is no , unless you have scheduled it . What this means is that homeowners insurance will cover some lost/stolen/broken items when you are away from your house . Typically cell phones and electronic devices are excluded ; however , cell phones and electronic devices can be scheduled on your policy . This means that they are specifically named as an item in your policy that will be covered in the case of a covered peril . I , however , do not recommend doing this because the deductible for your homeowners policy is usually much higher than a stand alone policy you can get for a phone .
If you are self employed and paying the cost of your health and disability insurance then it may be tax deductible . It is always good to consult your tax adviser for your individual situation however since each situation is different . For example , some people operate a side business and file a schedule C . Their insurance is paid through an employer . In this case , even though they file Schedule C , the premiums they pay may not be deductible .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Generally an annuity uses scheduled of fixed payments for a time certain period of basis and interest . Perpetuities are a schedule of fixed payments , generally for the life of the annuitant , of basis and interest with mortality credits added to the account tied to the age of the annuitant .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A Nursing Home Take Your Life Insurance Policy ?
There are limits on how much cash value can be in a Whole or Universal Life insurance policy in order to not exceed Medicaid asset guidelines . Term life insurance is not counted as an asset at all , since there is no cash value in Term insurance . If you do have a permanent policy with thousands of dollars of cash value , you have a number of choices . You can transfer ownership , but if entering a nursing home now , that will not protect it . You can possibly change it to a funeral policy , which is allowed . Or you can legally use the cash value to pay for nursing home care while holding onto some of the base coverage . Your social worker and life insurance agent can work together to make this the most favorable situation for you .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare pays for the first 20 days of a * qualified stay in the nursing home , and then it will pay all but $ 152/day to day 100 . After day 100 , the only nursing home care that is paid is what would have been paid if the recipient is not in the nursing home . I.e. Drugs and durable medical equipment , doctor visits , hospital stays , and other qualified products and services . * To be a qualified stay , the patient must have been in the hospital for at least three days for the same condition for which they are going to the nursing home . The health condition must be medically determined to need skilled nursing care from a Medicare approved facility . Without these qualifiers , Medicare will not pay any part of the nursing home care , except that which they would have received if they not in a nursing home .
If you have term life insurance it has no cash value . That would make the answer very simple . No one can take that from you . So your life insurance would remain secure while in a nursing home , if it is term insurance , so long as you can find a way to continue to pay the premiums . The more interesting question is what if you have permanent or cash value life insurance ? These policies build up value , and can actually be sold , or surrendered for cash . A nursing home might want that money . Depending on the nursing home and their contract with you , they might require you to pay them from such proceeds , but there is no legal requirement that you do so for them , and you can , of course , go to a different nursing home . The harder question is what if you have no or little other assets , and are planning to enter a government assisted facility ? Medicare will NOT pay for long term care , but MediCal will , but you will need to spend down your assets . So the question arises , if you are required to spend down your assets , will you have to sell the life insurance policy -LRB- meaning surrender its cash value -RRB- in order to stay in a MediCal nursing home . The answer to that very narrow specific question can change from time to time , as the MediCal rules change . But know that if you wish to claim impoverishment , and you retain ownership of a substantial cash value asset , you should expect the government to demand that you sell it and use the proceeds to pay for your care . Tread carefully . Thank you . GARY LANE .
You would need Long Term Care Insurance if you were no longer able to care for yourself and wanted to receive your care in your home or other location besides a nursing home . Medicare will pay for home health care or nursing home care if there is a need for skilled nursing services . If you need assistance with dressing and showering but do n't need IV 's , physical therapy , speech therapy , or other skilled nursing care , Medicare will not pay for in home services , adult day care , assisted living , or nursing home . Long Term Care insurance will pay for all those options if you are unable to perform 2 or 3 activities of daily living .
Medicare can provide some limited skilled nursing home care benefits . For days 1-20 , you pay $ 0 each benefit period . For days 21-100 , you pay $ 152 per day each benefit period . Days 101 + , you 're responsible for all costs . So , in short , Medicare will provide coverage for nursing care for up to 100 days . Medicaid can help pay nursing home expenses for Medicare beneficiaries . Medicare.gov provides a list of each specific covered service and eligibility conditions that need to be met for Medicare to cover nursing home care expenses . Long term care insurance is going to provide the greatest nursing home benefits .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Medicaid qualified annuities , or `` Medicaid friendly annuities '' , are annuities that can sometimes be used by couples when one person in the couple enters a nursing home . One spouse is able to keep half their assets and the home he/she lives in , the other spouse must spend down the other half on nursing home care before becoming eligible for Medicaid . Rather than spend down those funds , the spouse entering the nursing home transfers the money to the other spouse , who puts it in an irrevocable , immediate annuity that is set to pay the at-home spouse an income up to the number of years left in his/her life expectancy . Consult a knowledgeable elder law attorney in your state to see if this is allowed in your state , and to know all the pro 's and con 's before endeavoring to take out a Medicaid qualified annuity .
Medicare can provide some limited skilled nursing home care benefits under Part A . During the first 20 days of a benefit period , you pay $ 0 . From days 21-100 , you pay $ 152 per day . Days 101 + , you 're responsible for all costs . Medicare.gov provides a list of each specific covered service and eligibility conditions that need to be met for Medicare to cover nursing home care expenses . Medicaid can help pay nursing home expenses for Medicare beneficiaries . Long term care insurance is going to provide the greatest nursing home benefits . These policies are designed for long-term stays -LRB- e.g. 3 , 4 , or 5 years -RRB- .
Long Term Care Insurance is recommended for those having considerable assets . If you needed to go to a nursing home or assisted living facility , or receive home health care to assist you with your activities of daily living -LRB- dressing , eating , bathing , etc -RRB- , those institutions can go after your savings and investments while you are alive -LRB- if your spouse is alive , he/she can keep half -RRB- , and even take the proceeds from your home after you and your spouse die . If you have very little in the way of assets , long term care insurance is an unnecessary expense . But if you have assets you would like to protect , and can afford the premium , having long term care insurance is an excellent tool in planning your future , preserving your peace of mind , and paying the bills if needed . And a word about life insurance policies with living benefits . I am all in favor of them , but you do need to consider how much is `` enough '' when purchasing life insurance that you may want to use if you can no longer care for yourself . Nursing home costs average nearly $ 80,000 per year , nationally , for a semi-private room . Someone wanting to hire a round the clock caregiver in their home can expect to pay over $ 175,000 per year -LRB- $ 20 per hour -RRB- . It can be expensive to buy a permanent life insurance policy with face amounts large enough to cover even a couple years of care . Just be sure you understand how much of the life insurance face amount is available to you , what triggers it takes to get it , and when you can get it . Then compare it to the price of buying long term care insurance providing comparable benefits .
If the hospital stay that preceded your admittance into the nursing home was at least a three day stay , was for the condition that requires skilled care , and a few other stipulations , you will be admitted to a Medicare bed in the nursing home . For 20 days , all nursing home expenses are paid by Medicare . After 20 days , there is a copay until the maximum length of 100 days , at which time Medicare no longer contributes to nursing home expenses .
Nursing homes can not take your whole life insurance policy away from you , per se . But if you are in the spend down period of going on Medicaid to pay nursing home costs , they will put a limit on how much cash value your Whole Life insurance can have . That amount is around $ 1,500 . If your policy exceeds that amount , you have some choices : 1 -RRB- There is a law allowing people to keep some of their coverage , while using the rest for long term care expenses . 2 -RRB- You may be able to assign your policy to a funeral home . 3 -RRB- If you are looking down the road , you could change ownership of your policy to someone else . But this needs to be done 5 years in advance of going to the nursing home . 4 -RRB- In some situations , you can put your policy into an annuity . Please give me a call if you 'd like me to help you set up a final expense policy that will be protected if you enter an extended care facility , or to help you figure out what to do with coverage you already have .
Nursing home care is covered by Medicare in some circumstances . 1 . You must stay in a Medicare certified skilled nursing facility . 2 . You must enter the nursing home after a qualified inpatient hospital stay of at least three consecutive days -LRB- starting with the day you enter the hospital , not counting the day you leave -RRB- . 3 . You must enter the SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- within 30 days . 4 . Your doctor must have ordered the SNF stay due to your need for more than custodial care on a daily basis , and the SNF care must be for something treated during the qualifying hospital stay . 5 . Medicare Part A pays for up to 100 days of nursing home coverage .
Skilled Nursing Care is covered under Medicare Part A and can only follow at least a three day stay in a hospital . Skilled Nursing Care is rehab , the goal at a Skilled Nursing Facility is to get you better so you can come home . Medicare covers Skilled Nursing Care at 100 % for the first 20 days . If your doctor thinks you should stay longer than 20 days Medicare starts charging a co-pay of $ 157.50 per day for days 21-100 . Skilled Nursing Care should not be confused with Long Term Care because Medicare will only allow you to stay up to 100 days in a Skilled Nursing Facility . Be sure your Medicare Supplement policy covers the additional days -LRB- 21-100 -RRB- in a Skilled Nursing Facility .
Yes . The type of insurance that pays for nursing homes is called Long Term Care Insurance or LTC . These policies will cover nursing home stays and also will pay for assisted living facilities are even pay for assistance at your home to keep you out of a nursing home . There are many different types of LTC policies so make certain your agent gives you many choices and explains your options .
Medicare can pay for nursing home stays under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- The nursing home stay must be within 30 days of a qualified hospital stay in the hospital of at least days . 2 -RRB- There must be a prescribed medical need for daily skilled nursing or rehabilitative care . 3 -RRB- The facility must be Medicare approved . 4 -RRB- Medicare will only continue as long as the patient is showing improvement . 5 -RRB- The first 20 days are totally covered . Days 21-100 charge a co-payment that was $ 144.50 per day in 2012 . After 100 days , Medicare no longer pays any benefits for nursing home care .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . In general , Part A is going to cover : 1 -RRB- Hospital care 2 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care 3 -RRB- Hospice care 4 -RRB- Home health services 5 -RRB- Nursing home care Please note , nursing home care and skilled nursing care benefits are generally limited and certain conditions need to be met to provide coverage . If you want to have protection in the event you need long-term care , then you should secure a long-term care insurance policy -LRB- especially while you 're healthy so you can medically qualify for the coverage - it is not guaranteed issue -RRB- . You can visit the Medicare.gov website for specific information regarding exact coverage figures or send me a private message if you have any questions .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Child Support Include Health Insurance ?
In some situations a part of your divorce decree may include a stipulation that your ex-spouse provide health insurance coverage for your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . In some cases the cost of coverage is over and above the mandated monthly child support amount , or it may be included . Every situation is different so review your decree .
Does child support include health insurance ? Only if it is required by the divorce decree . In the decree , restrictions against enrollment are wavied to comply with the court order . It may or may not be part of the total payments for support , just depends on the details of the decree . If it is not part of the divorce decree , then it is up to the cooperation of the two people divorcing .
That depends entirely upon how the child support agreement was constructed . If there is not a specific requirement in the child support agreement that the person required to provide child support is required to provide health insurance for the child -LRB- ren -RRB- then there is a very high probability that they would not be required to provide health insurance . So , if the child support judgment requires one partner to just pay `` X '' amount of dollars every month for child support and makes no mention of a requirement to provide health insurance either out of that amount or in addition to it is unlikely that without a new judgment the ex-partner would have to provide health insurance . In my experience , a good divorce attorney specifically addresses this issue in writing in the order of child support as to which parent has the responsibility for providing health insurance for dependent children and even the potential duration of this requirement and the circumstances where it might be voided -LRB- re-marriage for example -RRB- . I am sure the rules on this crucial issue vary from state to state . Any couple with children who are divorcing should have this issue of responsibility for health insurance coverage clearly spelled out in their divorce and child support agreement .
Generally speaking , if the life insurance policy had a person named as Beneficiary , and the Insured person passed away , the benefits from that policy should go to the Beneficiary and be safe from garnishment for child support -LRB- if the garnishment was against the Insured -RRB- . If the Beneficiary stated in the policy is the estate , then the life insurance could be garnished for child support owed by the deceased . If the child support is owed by the Beneficiary , rules regarding wage garnishments against the Beneficiary of the life insurance proceeds vary by state . If you owe child support and are the Beneficiary of a life insurance policy in which the Insured passed away , there has to be a judgement made against you . Then , it varies by state whether any of the life insurance proceeds can be taken away from you for child support payment . You should contact legal counsel for the answer to this question .
Child support is determined by court order . If a vehicle premium was included in the computation then , yes , it is included . The person receiving the child support is free to spend the money as desired subject to court direction . There really isnt a direct relationship between child support and auto insurance premium .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
A person can usually get life insurance on their child 's father . Sometimes a court will even order the father to carry life insurance so that their child is provided for if the father should pass away , and his child support end . Whether or not your child 's father pays child support and/or has visitation rights may enter into the underwriter 's decision as to how much life insurance you can purchase on him . Shopping among a number of companies should find you one that will provide you with the amount you desire .
Life insurance is a contract between an insurance company and the owner . The subject of the insurance , the insured , may be someone other than the owner . The owner is the person with the power to change the beneficiary . In a divorce settlement care should be taken to identify the owner of the insurance . Existing insurance is difficult to handle in a divorce settlement . When alimony and/or child support is involved it is often better to have the recipient of those payments purchase and own a policy of life insurance on the party paying the alimony or child support . By doing that all of the control over the policy is in the hands of the recipient , to include the power to change the beneficiary . The other major area of concern involving divorce and life insurance is company sponsored life insurance . Often this is overlooked and the intentions of the court and the desires of the beneficiary thwarted if ownership remains in the hands of the other party . The employee can merely call the HR department and changes the beneficiary to someone else .
In some situations a part of your divorce decree may include a stipulation that your ex-spouse provide health insurance coverage for your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . In some cases the cost of coverage is over and above the mandated monthly child support amount , or it may be included . Every situation is different so review your decree .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Some of the items and services that Medicare does n't cover include : < a title = '' Services that include medical and non-medical care provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living , like dressing or bathing . Long-term supports and services can be provided at home , in the community , in assisted living , or in nursing homes . Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age . Medicare and most health insurance plans do n't pay for long-term care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > Long-term care -LRB- also called < a title = '' Non-skilled personal care , like help with activities of daily living like bathing , dressing , eating , getting in or out of a bed or chair , moving around , and using the bathroom . It may also include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves , like using eye drops . In most cases , Medicare does n't pay for custodial care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > custodial care -RRB- Most dental care Eye examinations related to prescribing glasses Dentures Cosmetic surgery Acupuncture Hearing aids and exams for fitting them Routine foot care You can go to the medicare.gov website and check on the main page if any test , item or service is covered by Medicare .
Child support depends upon the person paying it to live . The children and the ex-spouse have an insurable interest in the person owing the child support . When the attorneyss hammer out the agreement the parent with custody should insist on two things , cooperation from her ex-spouse to secure life insurance , and that the child support include enough to cover the insurance premium in addition to other expenses . However , dont use transferred life insurance to do this job . Have the spouse with custody apply for the policy and be owner , payer and beneficiary . That way you know that the policy will be in force when death occurs . This has happened to my clients .
According to the Affordable Care Act , the following individuals can claim a `` hardship exemption '' and not be forced to purchase health coverage or pay a tax penalty for not doing so : You were homeless . You were evicted in the past 6 months or were facing eviction or foreclosure . You received a shut-off notice from a utility company . You recently experienced domestic violence . You recently experienced the death of a close family member . You experienced a fire , flood , or other natural or human-caused disaster that caused substantial damage to your property . You filed for bankruptcy in the last 6 months . You had medical expenses you couldnt pay in the last 24 months . You experienced unexpected increases in necessary expenses due to caring for an ill , disabled , or aging family member . You expect to claim a child as a tax dependent whos been denied coverage in Medicaid and CHIP , and another person is required by court order to give medical support to the child . In this case , you do not have the pay the penalty for the child . As a result of an eligibility appeals decision , youre eligible for enrollment in a qualified health plan -LRB- QHP -RRB- through the Marketplace , lower costs on your monthly premiums , or cost-sharing reductions for a time period when you werent enrolled in a QHP through the Marketplace . You were determined ineligible for Medicaid because your state didnt expand eligibility for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act . Your individual insurance plan was cancelled and you believe other Marketplace plans are unaffordable . You experienced another hardship in obtaining health insurance . There are other circumstances in which an indivdual would not have to pay the tax penalty , also known as the individual responsibility payment : Youre uninsured for less than 3 months of the year The lowest-priced coverage available to you would cost more than 8 % of your household income You dont have to file a tax return because your income is too low Youre areeligible for services through an Indian Health Services provider Youre a member of a recognized health care sharing ministry Youre a member of a recognized religious sect with religious objections to insurance , including Social Security and Medicare Youre incarcerated , and not awaiting the disposition of charges against you Youre not lawfully presentin the U.S. .
While there is no requirement for a life insurance company to report benefits being received to the Court , if someone owes child support , it would be possible for the party that is owed the money to hire an attorney in order to get a court order to seize those funds . If the amount owed is significant , some attorneys will take a case like this on a contingency . basis If you are the beneficiary and owe support , and if the other party is not aware of it , then you should receive the money without any problems , and use a portion of the funds to pay your overdue support .
Usually when a Life Insurance policy is written . The agent will qualify the the buyer with what is called Human Value Life Approach which simply means the financial value of the policyholder . The value is judged on the financial needs of the family id the policyholder is no longer there to support the family after any unfortunate mishap as a result . Bills must be paid . Funeral expenses . Child support , or any other financial regard to support the beneficiaries of the policy . A future analysis is given as to the present financial situation compared to what will be needed upon distribution of the benefit . There is also the consideration to purchase high amounts of a tax free lump sum benefit in order to create an estate , and distribute wealth for generations to come . There are policies that have a retirement value other than traditional cash value policies . Some may call it modified endowment , but , other names are according to how the company names it . Paid up policies are very much a benefit to this question . Like a Trans-Security policy from Trans America .
Under the Affordable Care Act , for the first time in U.S. history , the federal government now requires to purchase health insurance . The requirement that everyone buy insurance , also known as a mandate , is a key component for the law to expand coverage to be able to work . To get coverage for sick people , insurers need as many healthy people in the pool of customers as possible , so the cost of the sick are spread amongst many policy holders . Starting this year , the insurance industry will have to cover millions of new customers who may have health problems and turn no one away , resulting in the government 's guarantee the insurers millions of new , healthy customers . However , under certain circumstances , you may not have to make the individual responsibility payment . This is called an exemption , which you may qualify for an exemption if : Youre uninsured for less than 3 months of the year The lowest-priced coverage available to you would cost more than 8 % of your household income You dont have to file a tax return because your income is too low Youre a member of a tribe or eligible for services through an Indian Health Services provider Youre a member of a recognized health care sharing ministry Youre a member of a recognized religious sect with religious objections to insurance , including Social Security and Medicare Youre incarcerated , and not awaiting the disposition of charges against you Youre not lawfully present in the U.S. Hardship exemptions If you have any of the circumstances below that affect your ability to purchase health insurance coverage , you may qualify for a hardship exemption : You were homeless . You were evicted in the past 6 months or were facing eviction or foreclosure . You received a shut-off notice from a utility company . You recently experienced domestic violence . You recently experienced the death of a close family member . You experienced a fire , flood , or other natural or human-caused disaster that caused substantial damage to your property . You filed for bankruptcy in the last 6 months . You had medical expenses you couldnt pay in the last 24 months . You experienced unexpected increases in necessary expenses due to caring for an ill , disabled , or aging family member . You expect to claim a child as a tax dependent whos been denied coverage in Medicaid and CHIP , and another person is required by court order to give medical support to the child . In this case , you do not have the pay the penalty for the child . As a result of an eligibility appeals decision , youre eligible for enrollment in a qualified health plan -LRB- QHP -RRB- through the Marketplace , lower costs on your monthly premiums , or cost-sharing reductions for a time period when you werent enrolled in a QHP through the Marketplace . You were determined ineligible for Medicaid because your state didnt expand eligibility for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act . Your individual insurance plan was cancelled and you believe other Marketplace plans are unaffordable . You experienced another hardship in obtaining health insurance .
The question is a little vague , but if you mean can life insurance be part of the child support arrangement as a component of custody , the answer is yes . Many attorneys require the spouse to carry life insurance on themselves for the benefit of the children for their ongoing support in the event of death .
This question is very non-desript . If you are asking if child support paid would have an inclusion of an amount specifically for auto insurance , then that would be a question for your attorney or the judge that ruled on the support amount . I have not personally ever heard of this every being done .
QDRO or a Qualified Domestic Relations Order comes through the courts in a divorce case . This order typically deals with divorce settlements concerning finances and retirement plans such as IRAs , Roth IRAs , 401Ks , 403bs and cash value life insurance plans . If you or your ex spouse owns cash value life insurance , then yes , the cash value is included in QDRO calculations . In most cases , term life insurance plans are not included in these calculations because there is no value unless a death occurs . You or your ex spouse can also be court ordered to carry a term life policy to cover alimony and or child support in case of an early death .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Necessary ?
If you have a family , business or both then I would say a life insurance policy is highly recommended . You risk the well being of the people you leave behind if you do n't . If you are the main bread winner I would add that you should definitely purchase a policy because I am sure you are a responsible adult and would not want to leave your family/business partners swinging in the wind when their financial security blanket is gone . Just a thought .
Life insurance is only necessary if you have a set outcome that you want to achieve , and you can not reach that goal without it . E.g. Maybe your goal is that your children can go to college , even if you are not around to finance their education . Do you have enough invested or saved up now to attain that goal ? If not , life insurance would be necessary if you died in a short time , because no other vehicle could provide a large infusion of cash into your assets shortly after you took it out . No one can look into the heart of someone else to determine that something is necessary for them . But you can tell that by looking at your own goals , determining if you have the funds to meet those , and then judging whether life insurance is something that could help you attain those outcomes , either in life or in death .
Why is health insurance necessary ? Actually it 's not necessary , at least for another year . In 2014 changes will be coming . But as of today , health insurance is not necessary to have . You can self insure . The thing is if you self insure and have claims , you 're expected to pay them . So you would have to surrender assests to pay that bill . Insurance of ANY KIND is simply a form of liquid money to pay for things so that your other invested wealth can `` stay '' invested . So no insurance is never necessary , it just is a smart solution for some issues .
To be specific about what health insurance does not cover , you would have to check your plan 's policy 's exclusions & limitations . However , if you 're asking a general question , I think the key term here is `` medically necessary '' . If your provider bills a service as medically necessary , then it would generally be covered . From a common sense standpoint , why would an insurance company cover something that 's not medically necessary . A good example of something that 's not medically necessary is cosmetic surgery .
Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met ; days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 152 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Qualifications to receive the Medicare SNF benefit : 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Although a Medicare plan may cover SNF copayments , given the qualification restrictions for the Medicare SNF benefit , Medicare beneficiaries should consider separate Short Term Care nursing facility coverage to manage the financial risk of an uncovered SNF stay .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Life insurance is only necessary if you have a set outcome that you want to achieve , and you can not reach that goal without it . E.g. Maybe your goal is that your children can go to college , even if you are not around to finance their education . Do you have enough invested or saved up now to attain that goal ? If not , life insurance would be necessary if you died in a short time , because no other vehicle could provide a large infusion of cash into your assets shortly after you took it out . No one can look into the heart of someone else to determine that something is necessary for them . But you can tell that by looking at your own goals , determining if you have the funds to meet those , and then judging whether life insurance is something that could help you attain those outcomes , either in life or in death .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
Breast augmentation is generally considered a cosmetic procdure and not a medically necessary procedure , therefore , it is usually not covered . Breast reduction can be considered medically necessary and covered by health insurance if the breasts are causing back and neck issues . If it is considered medically necessary the surgery is covered once a woman is 18 years old and an adult .
Most health insurance will only pay for breast reductions if it is medically necessary . Medically necessary is a subjective term . For example if you want breast reduction surgery for cosmetic reasons it would not be covered . If on the other hand if you were 5 ' 2 '' and needed reduction surgery to ease back issues posture and pain it may be medically necessary . You should check with you doctor , read your Evidence of Coverage and check with the insurance company .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Life insurance is not essential in terms of being mandated . E.g. Auto insurance is legally required in order to drive a car . Life insurance is not legally required in order to live . Life insurance is essential to most people , however , in terms of being necessary . The people who it is necessary to are not the person being insured . They are those who are left behind .
Pet Health Insurance is a good idea if you are willing to go to extreme measures to treat your pet , or save its life . Consumer Reports in Sept of 2011 concluded that pet insurance is not necessary for those who are willing to set aside some money each month for their pets ' medical needs . However , other agencies concluded that it is necessary due to the high cost of treating pets and managing their pain . Again , if you are willing to provide dialysis , transplants , diabetes shots , and the like to extend the life of your pet , pet insurance can pay off .
The insurance company will compute this amount for you should it ever be necessary . Basically , it is the sum of premiums paid for the life insurance protection alone . This disregards the cost of riders . This basis would only be necessary if you surrender a policy and receive income in excess of your premium payments .
Life insurance coverage depends on how long the economic liability is . For example the earnings of the family bread winners are necessary to pay a 30 year home mortgage , so 30 years of coverage may be necessary as well . Buy term lifeinsuranceif the economic liability is temporary . Buypermanentlife insurance if the economic liability is perpetual .
No , health insurance generally will not pay for a hot tub . I personally have never heard of a situation that would warrant a medical necessity for a private hot tub . Health insurance is designed to pay for Medically necessary costs and procedures . Unless your doctor can show the insurance company that a hot tub is a medically necessary item -LRB- which will be a hard fight -RRB- it will not be covered under any policy that I am aware of .
Medicare covers items that are considered medically necessary . This includes diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions caused by accident or illness . Medicare will also cover some DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- if prescribed by a doctor as part of your treatment plan . Services such as Life Alert are not considered medically necessary .
Health insurance covers procedures and treatment that is considered medically necessary . IVF is not considered medically necessary and in most cases is not a covered expense . There are exceptions where local regulations mandate coverage for IVF . Check with your state Dept. of Insurance for clarification . Some employer group plans may cover IVF .
I am assuming you are talking about dental veneers , in which case the answer would be no unless they are medically necessary due to a covered illness or accident . You dental insurance may offer some coverage for tooth veneers . Health insurance is designed to help pay for illness or accident and will not generally cover any cosmetic non medically necessary procedure
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Would A Person Buy Term Life Insurance ?
Some reasons a person would buy Term Life insurance are : 1 -RRB- they feel that their need for life insurance is going to go down or disappear after the length of the term , 2 -RRB- they do n't feel that they can afford permanent life insurance , 3 -RRB- they are required by a loan or other contract to purchase a term policy , or 4 -RRB- they are just providing for a contingency while saving up enough money to provide for their needs in other ways in the future . A reputable life insurance agency can guide them through this decision making process so that the type of insurance they purchase realistically meets their needs .
Term life insurance is often purchased when a consumer wants the maximum amount of coverage for the least cost . Often , in this situation , benefits are only needed for a fixed period of time ... perhaps 15 or 20 years . Term life policies are issued by most major carriers and policies can be canceled at any time . There is no cash value or loan value , so they are not designed to provide any equity or liquidity in future years . Term coverage is often kept until either all dependents in the home are self-sufficient or additional money is not needed in case of a death of the insured . A licensed experienced broker can easily review which type of policy is the most cost-effective , and which carrier provides the lowest available rates based on your health history .
Term life insurance is needed when you have a temporary debt that you do n't want others to be burdened with such as a home mortgage , car loans , credit card debts , college tuition , etc. . Coverage for items such as income replacement and leaving a legacy to your family should ideally be covered by a permanent life insurance policy . I would recommend consulting with an experienced independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine how much coverage you should have in place and how long you should have it for . Since budget is an obvious concern for most , many people will create a coverage structure that will best serve their needs even if it can not cover everything . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
Most Life Insurance sold in the US is term insurance either through an employer , or group or directly to an individual . The concept is that you will be able to buy a certain level of coverage guaranteed at a certain price during some specified time period . So , it would be common to sell someone term life for a term of 10 years , 15 years or 20 years . The policy usually allows this purchase during the `` term '' without having to provide any documentation of insurability . Keep in mind a couple truisms . life Insurance is virtually always more expensive in the future then it is toady . Why ? You grow older . Secondly , a significant amount of Term insurance , never has an actual payout of benefits . Why ? The person insured lives past the end of the term . So while you may need Term insurance for the short term , take a look at whole life or variations of it that allows cash value accumulations .
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
The only way to answer this is to look at your situation and determine why you should consider having Life Insurance . Here are some examples why you would consider having a Life Insurance . you are married . A life policy would pay off any expenses and help to maintain the standard of living you currently have or perhaps want to provide the means to improve the living standard . you have children . This is a common reason . Have coverage to support your spouse until the kids move out . Perhaps you want to make sure the children have the means to go to college if you were to die prematurely . your a partner owning a business . Life Insurance is used for Key Person & Buy-Sell agreements . Key Person pays the company for lost income if a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee passes while the company looks for someone to replace you . Buy-Sell purchases the ownership of your partners half that would otherwise fall to the family , surviving spouse . you have a bank loan . Sometimes , depending on the structure of a loan , you might be required to have Life Insurance which would pay the loan back upon your untimely death . This is one way a bank may minimize the risk on the loan defaulting . There are just 4 examples which are common . There are many other situations where it is good to have Life Insurance . Contact your agent/broker to discuss your situation .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Why buy whole life for a child ? Well I guess I can tell you why I bought whole life for my kids . In no particular order or rank , I bought whole life because that is the cheapest if will ever be , those policies will become cornerstones of their financial lives . Much like buying a piece of property they now have something to build on . They have future guaranteed insurability with these policies as well What that means is they ca n't be told `` no '' by the insurance company , even if they are no longer insurable . Sort of like a stock option . And finally for this post if either of my kids were to die before me I would be devastated . I would be crushed as I have great kids . So insurance on them would help me get through their passing by paying bills that still need to be paid . I am planning for their future living with these policies and accepting the aspect of the possibility of their early passing and the help they would provide . I could never imagine having an argument with a spouse over what headstone to buy . Whole life on a child is an investment in their future , not just their death .
Pure Term Life insurance has premiums that increase every year as you get older . Most people do n't like a premium that goes up every year so they decide how long they need the insurance and level out the premiums by buying level premium term . When you do this you are paying extra in the earlier years in order to level out the premium in the later years of your level premium period . That is why 1-year term is much cheaper than 20-year term . When you buy term life insurance , you should determine how long you want the premium to be level and buy it for that length . For instance if your mortgage is paid off in 18-more years , you should buy a 20-year level term policy if the mortgage payoff is the reason for the insurance .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
Lets use the analogy of living in a home . You basically have two choices : to buy , or to rent . Suppose you rent . Why would you do that ? First of all , you dont have to put any money up . Nor do you have to pay any real estate taxes . Nor do you have to pay for any maintenance . Its basically a cheap way to put a roof over your head . But , you always have the option to buy . Suppose now you buy . Why would you do that ? Equity . You have something to show for your money . Your home attains a monetary value that can be exploited . Of course , it costs more . But you get more . And you still get a roof over your head . This model is useful for understanding life insurance . Term insurance is like renting a home . Its a pretty cheap way to get the coverage you need . No equity , no added value . But you can convert it to a permanent policy . Whole life equates to buying a home . You pay more , but you get more . There is cash available for you to use , in addition to the survivor benefit for your heirs - that roof over your head . Make sense ?
Term Life Insurance provides benefits only upon the death of the insured individual during the `` term '' . There are many reasons why a individual may chose to purchase a term policy instead of a whole life policy . The answer to your question is tied into the reasons why a individual purchased the coverage . Level Term Life Insurance policies generally have set periods of time -LRB- 10,20,30 years -RRB- where they will provide benefits , with level term premiums and benefits never change during the `` term '' or period of time that the individual is covered . There are also increasing/decreasing term life policies that are used to address different needs . The most common example would be a individual being contractually obligated to purchase decreasing term life when obtaining a mortgage . The policy would start out with death benefits equal to the mortgage , and decrease as the individual payed of the mortgage . The end result would be both the policy and the mortgage balance decreasing to $ 0 by the end of the period .
There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
Why should you buy life insurance ? Maybe you should n't . If no one depends on you for income , if you will have no final expenses to bury or cremate you , if you do n't care about the person that might be stuck paying off your debt , then , do n't buy life insurance . Also , people that do not believe in insurance should n't buy it . In spite of the fact that owning an insurance policy is not a religious commitment , buying it might disrupt their value system and enrich an already wealthy insurance agent or insurance company . On the other hand , if you do care about anything other than yourself at all , you should consider buying it . Even a small face amount of life insurance is better than having none . It might provide you with some peace of mind as the gurney you are bleeding to death on is being rolled into the surgical unit .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
This is a good question . Because you used the word `` more '' , I am guessing you already have life insurance . Take a look at your coverage to determine if it would be enough to pay off the debt . If it is not , then a term policy would be a great option . If this question came to mind because Mortgage Life Insurance was offered by the lender I would caution you to consider buying standard term life instead . Since mortgage life insurance is designated to pay off the loan it typically has a decreasing benefit that is in line with the pay off of the note . Another words your premiums stay the same but the pay out decreases as your debt decreases . The beneficiary is the mortgage company , so if the note is sold or you refinance you will have to rewrite the policy too . There are scenarios where mortgage life insurance is a good option . One that comes to mind is if someone has an underlying reason why they may be declined for life insurance . Mortgage life insurance can sometimes have less stringent medical screening . Life insurance should always be designed around all your financial needs . That is why it is best to work with a licensed agent who will take the time to understand your particular situation and advise you of your options . Good luck !
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance If I Have A Preexisting Condition ?
You can get health insurance if you have a pre-existing condition . Many policies are approved when applicants are being treated for illness or sickness and are taking medications . Extremely serious conditions such as heart disease or cancer present a bolder challenge . However , in October , Open Enrollment begins for 2014 effective dates when all pre-existing conditions will be covered and no medical questions will be answered . `` Exchange '' plans will be sold with brokers and reputable websites helping consumers navigate through a new way of buying health insurance . You may also qualify for a federal tax subsidy . As an experienced broker myself , we realize that due to the complexity of the changes in healthcare , our expertise and help will be utilized . Naturally , there are never any broker fees .
Preexisting conditions may affect a disability insurance policy in two different ways . When applying for a policy , you may be asked a variety of medical questions . This is a normal part of the underwriting process . The carrier may decline the application for a variety of prior and existing medical condition . If issued the policy , most contracts will contain exclusion language for preexisting conditions . Disabilities that begin within the first twelve months of the policy effective date are normally excluded from coverage .
A preexisting condition can be an out right declination depending on the impairment or disease . Whatever the preexisting condition is there are some that may have a possibility of placement depending on how the records are presented and if any mitigating circumstances can credit the underwriting balance sheet in a positive manner .
Preexisting conditions ? Which ones ? Disability insurance is a morbidity product based on living incidents that can impair your ability to earn a living . Most preexisting conditions will disqualify you from disability insurance . However many employer group benefits carry short term disability with some as an automatic enrollment feature which would assist you in securing some coverage .
It is difficult to say for certain whether you can purchase disability insurance with a pre-existing condition . The answer depends upon what medical condition you have and it 's severity , and where you purchase the policy . Every insurer will ask medical questions and may decline an application if you are deemed likely to make a claim due to your condition . Group policies offered at work sometimes allow for guaranteed issue if enough employees participate . Company paid plans automatically include all employees regardless of health . There may be an exclusion period during which benefits are not paid when the loss is caused by a preexisting condition .
Prior to 01/2014 there was a Federal Health Insurance Pool in which people who were denied health insurance would be accepted . This way everyone could purchase health insurance coverage even if they had a preexisting medical condition . Since the ACA now mandates the ALL health insurance carriers must accept everyone there is no longer a need for a health insurance pool and the plans have been dissolved .
Yes , a person with MS can get health insurance . Effective January 1 , 2014 all individual health insurance plans will no longer have preexisting condition issues . You should speak with an independent health insurance agent to discuss your needs and they will be able to show you plans from all the major carriers .
You can purchase health insurance with Hepatitis C as a preexisting medical condition . There would be no waiting period before benefits begin , but time is quickly running out . The Affordable Care Act requires that health plans accept all applicants regardless of existing medical conditions . Applicants need to enroll in a plan during the annual open enrollment period through their state insurance exchange . The first open enrollment ends on March 31 of 2014 - in just a few days . Coverage would begin April 1 . If you miss this open enrollment window you could enroll in plans with a January 1 , 2015 effective date .
You should not have been denied health insurance . The Affordable Care Act requires that health insurers accepts all applicants regardless of prior medical history . People with preexisting conditions must also be accepted , and the coverage for preexisting conditions must begin with no waiting period . Apply for coverage through your state health insurance exchange .
Obama Care is working well in California . Go to www.coveredca.com to get started on a quote . The new law has made insurance much less expensive if you have a preexisting condition -LRB- like cancer or diabetes -RRB- or if you qualify for income assistance . People who earn less than $ 48,000 per year may be eligible for premium assistance . In this video WEBSITELINK I show you an example of a 30 year old who earns $ 25,000 per year who can get the Bronze level plan for $ 18 per month .
There are many factors that can contribute to the cost of your insurance . First , there is the type of plan that you choose . A more basic plan that covers only emergency or sickness will cost less on your monthly premiums , but will most likely not cover wellness visits . A more comprehensive plan that covers various wellness visits and tests will be more expensive on your monthly premium , but may save you money in the long run due finding health problems before a catastrophic illness . Other contributing factors are age , lifestyle and previous medical conditions . A person who is in decent health at average height and weight will pay less than someone who is overweight , uses tobacco and has a preexisting medical condition . Options that you choose for your medical plan can also raise or lower your premium . Going with a low annual deductible will cause your monthly premium be higher versus going with a higher deductible . If you are relatively healthy and are comfortable with having a higher out-of-pocket cost will save on the premium . Of course , if you do end up needing to go to the doctor or having a test done , you may end up paying more due to the deductible . Also , having a doctor visit copay option on your plan may make going to the doctor easier to pay , but that option will add to your premium . Health insurance can be a confusing thing to purchase . By doing your research and contacting an agent , it can be a little less confusing and help save you and your family from a financial crisis .
No . Life Insurance Carriers will not cancel your policy after developing Cancer or other serious medical conditions . They may cancel for non-payment of premiums or failure to disclose , if it was a preexisting condition . However , if you have a Term Life policy that expires after 10-30 years , it may not be possible to qualify for new coverage .
Most disability plans will exclude preexisting conditions . A company is not going to pay for a disability caused by a known problem . For example if you are being treated for a bad back and become disabled for a back issue as a result , the company would not pay . The condition will usually be excluded in writing or the policy in some cases may be declined .
Disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income during the time you are unable to work because of a covered accident or illness . Each policy has different exclusions for which medical conditions are covered . Many policies will not cover on-the-job accidents as this is addressed by workers compensation . Preexisting medical conditions may not be covered if the disability begins within the first twelve months of the policy effective date . Elective medical procedures may also be excluded . Mental illnesses are excluded by most policies but not all . Check your policy language for specifics .
This question was asked before implementation of the Affordable Care Act , but the answer highlights important features of the new law : coverage for preexisting conditions , and the mandate to purchase . Health insurance in NY was expensive because laws required insurers to issue policies regardless of health . Healthy people were not required to purchase a policy . Eventually only the sickest people enrolled in the plans , forcing premiums very high . The Affordable Care Act includes a mandate for health people to purchase coverage . It remains to be seen if the penalty for being uninsured is stiff enough to avoid what happened in NY .
In most states , you can now buy health insurance through the federal government website WEBSITELINK . This is a free service where you can view the plans that are available to you . Many people qualify for subsidies to help them pay premiums , and they can not turn you down due to preexisting conditions .
There is a chance that this question is asking `` Why do employers offer life insurance to employees '' . If that is the intent of the question , the response is to attract and retain qualified employees . Companies that offer life insurance as an employee retention tool provide group plans . In group plans the employer owns the contract , and pays the premium . All employees are automatically covered . That means people with poor health or preexisting conditions can get coverage .
Due to the passing of the Health Care Reform everyone is accepted regardless of preexisting health conditions . You will need to enroll during open enrollment which ends on March 31 , 2014 for this year . There are a variety of standardized plans which only thing you need to decide is whether you qualify for government subsidies or not .
All ACA/Obamacare compliant plans are required to cover Maternity and preexisting conditions . New plans are also cover 100 % of preventive care at no cost . Therefore , I would recommend a plan with a $ 500 - $ 1,000 deductible and the lowest out-of-maximum . You should also verify that the Doctor -LRB- s -RRB- and Hospital you plan to use accept the HMO or PPO Network .
Short Term Health Insurance is designed to cover individuals who are between jobs . Generally they can be purchased in increments of six months . Preexisting conditions are not covered . They are non-renewable , meaning if you have a six month policy for example , and the six month period expires , you need to enroll in a completely new plan .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Debtors Collect Life Insurance ?
A debtor can collect on the proceeds of a life insurance policy if that party is the beneficiary of a policy . It can depend on what state you reside in as to whether your life insurance proceeds can be exempt , if you are beneficiary because of statues you should not have any problems . The Creditor would have to know also that the policy existed to be able to pursue the debt in this manner . There are state and federal statues regarding creditors rights in insurance . Insurance was developed to protect against contingencies that might financially interfere with the proceeds that were set up for someones loved ones .
Debtors who are collecting on a debt left by the insured person who died , can not collect it from the life insurance left to the beneficiary , unless the beneficiary was co-signer on the debt . If the debt was incurred by the beneficiary , then debtors can come after the life insurance that the beneficiary collected upon the death of the Insured .
Debtors who are collecting on a debt left by the insured person who died , can not collect it from the life insurance left to the beneficiary , unless the beneficiary was co-signer on the debt . If the debt was incurred by the beneficiary , then debtors can come after the life insurance that the beneficiary collected upon the death of the Insured .
A debtor can collect on the proceeds of a life insurance policy if that party is the beneficiary of a policy . It can depend on what state you reside in as to whether your life insurance proceeds can be exempt , if you are beneficiary because of statues you should not have any problems . The Creditor would have to know also that the policy existed to be able to pursue the debt in this manner . There are state and federal statues regarding creditors rights in insurance . Insurance was developed to protect against contingencies that might financially interfere with the proceeds that were set up for someones loved ones .
I life insurance policy is a contract that operates outside of probate . Debtors present obligations to probate . The only way that life insurance proceeds would be used to satisfy debtors is when the beneficiary has died or the beneficiary was the estate . There are ways that a debtor can secure their debt with life insurance and many do that . Mortgage companies can not secure debt with a life insurance policy , their recourse is the residence .
There are assets protected from creditors by federal and/or state statute . Those assets are considered essential for the debtor to maintain at least a financial well-being . Creditor protection is balanced by the concerns for creditor 's rights to access the debtor 's assets . Annuities can be argued as a legitimate retirement plan like IRAs . Some states exempt annuities from the claims of creditors . Each state has differing views and regulations on the claims of creditors . Seek out legal counsel to determine what assets are protected from claims of creditors .
Life insurance purchasers are required to have an insurable interest in the life of the insured . Insurable interest generally must exist at policy inception . The underlying principle is that a purchaser must have a reasonable expectation of profit or benefit from the continued life of the insured . You have no limit on insuring your own life so you can name anyone as the beneficiary of your own policy . When you take out a policy on the life of another , there are limits : 1 . Family members related by blood or marriage have an insurable interest in each other e.g. Parent/child and child by adoption , siblings , spouse , grandparents/grandchildren , and in some states , engaged couples . There is generally no insurable interest in nieces/nephews , cousins , aunts/uncles , other relative by marriage or stepparents/stepchildren . 2 . Creditors have insurable interest in a debtor to the extent of the debt . 3 . Business relationships which give rise to a financial dependency : an employee can insure an employer or vise versa . Partners can insured each other . Key employees can be insured by their employer . So , for example , two cousins who would otherwise not have an insurable interest , jointly own a business and therefore have an insurable interest in the other . The life insured always needs to consent with their signature and would need to consent by signature to the release and use of their medical information in the underwriting process for underwritten policies .
Who should own a life policy depends on facts and circumstances surrounding the purpose of the insurance . Often the owner is the insured and names a spouse the beneficiary . Life insurance purchasers are required to have an insurable interest in the life of the insured . Insurable interest generally must exist at policy inception . The underlying principle is that a purchaser must have a reasonable expectation of profit or benefit from the continued life of the insured . You have no limit on insuring your own life so you can name anyone as the beneficiary of your own policy . When you take out a policy on the life of another , there are limits on who can own the policy : 1 . Family members related by blood or marriage have an insurable interest in each other e.g. Parent/child and child by adoption , siblings , spouse , grandparents/grandchildren , and in some states , engaged couples . There is generally no insurable interest in nieces/nephews , cousins , aunts/uncles , other relative by marriage or stepparents/stepchildren . 2 . Creditors have insurable interest in a debtor to the extent of the debt . 3 . Business relationships which give rise to a financial dependency : an employee can insure an employer or vise versa . Partners can insured each other . Key employees can be insured by their employer . So , for example , two cousins who would otherwise not have an insurable interest , jointly own a business and therefore have an insurable interest in the other . The life insured always needs to consent with their signature and would need to consent by signature to the release and use of their medical information in the underwriting process for underwritten policies .
Life insurance purchasers are required to have an insurable interest in the life of the insured . Insurable interest generally must exist at policy inception . The underlying principle is that a purchaser must have a reasonable expectation of profit or benefit from the continued life of the insured . When you take out a policy on the life of another , there are limits on who can own the policy : 1 . Family members related by blood or marriage have an insurable interest in each other e.g. Parent/child and child by adoption , siblings , spouse , grandparents/grandchildren , and in some states , engaged couples . There is generally no insurable interest in nieces/nephews , cousins , aunts/uncles , other relative by marriage or stepparents/stepchildren . 2 . Creditors have insurable interest in a debtor to the extent of the debt . 3 . Business relationships which give rise to a financial dependency : an employee can insure an employer or vise versa . Partners can insure each other . Key employees can be insured by their employer . So , for example , two cousins who would otherwise not have an insurable interest , jointly own a business and therefore have an insurable interest in the other . Note that the life insured always needs to consent to the insurance with their signature and would need to consent by signature to the release and use of their medical information in the underwriting process for underwritten policies .
Can Debtors take life insurance ? Couple ways to answer this question as I think it may be a bit off . People in Debt can take out life insurance , but it will actually depend on how bad it is.Life Insurance companies will credit your credit ratings and may decline to cover a person if their finances are bad . Did you mean `` Can Creditors take your life insurance ? '' In most cases NO . It 's going to depend on what state you 're in for complete details , but usually the courts exclude life insurance from settlements because the beneficairy is an `` innocent '' party to the problem .
At no time in the life of Term policies do they have cash value to borrow against , so no you can not borrow against a term policy . Additionally you can not use a term life policy as collateral for a loan as you can with a Whole Life policy . Credit term policies are designed to pay off a debt in the case of death of the debtor before the credit is repaid . On the other hand , Whole Life policies have cash value , grow wealth tax free , may be used as collateral and may be borrowed against . Contact me for more information .
If you mean can creditors , rather than debtors , take life insurance proceeds upon the death of the insured , they generally can not as long as the beneficiary of the policy is a person . If the beneficiary is the estate , creditors can go after the estate for payment of past debts on the part of the insured .
If you are the debtor -LRB- person owing a debt -RRB- and you are the beneficiary of life insurance money , yes you can take the proceeds . They are legally yours . However , your creditors -LRB- person or entity lending you the money -RRB- may come after your life insurance proceeds and take them from you .
As Ed Harris said above there are MANY different types of Life Insurance . It is true that there are two basic ` categories ' , which are Term and Permanent , but within those categories there are many different solutions or types of life insurance . For instance , Credit Life is a form of Term insurance which insures a creditor against the death of the debtor . Term insurance is basically `` death insurance '' . It has no cash value and no `` living benefits '' unless it has an ` accelerated benefit rider ' , which pays out or `` accelerates '' a portion of the death benefit in the case of critical or chronic illness . The ` Permanent ' category includes ` Universal ' and Whole Life - which is the only truly permanent type of life insurance . Within these categories there are many types again . There are buy-sell agreements and Key-Man policies designed specifically for businesses . There are variable and indexed policies , which are tied to the stock market or to specific stock indexes . There are `` participating '' and `` non-participating '' policies , which refers to the paying of dividends into the cash value of policies . There are Individual , First to die and Last to die policies . For more information contact an experienced Insurance Adviser / Broker . If in Hawaii I will be happy to help you .
The corporation is either the total or partial beneficiary on the policy , and an employee or group of employees , owner or debtor is listed as the insured -LRB- s -RRB- . Fundamentally , COLI differs from group life insurance policies that are typically offered to most or all of the employees in a company , because this type of insurance is designed to protect the employees and their families and not the company itself . COLI can be structured in many different ways to accomplish many different objectives . One of the most common is to fund certain types of nonqualified plans , such as a split-dollar life insurance policy that allows the company to recoup its premium outlay into the policy by naming itself as the beneficiary for the amount of premium paid , with the remainder going to the employee who is the insured on the policy . Other forms of COLI include key person life insurance that pays the company a death benefit upon the death of a key employee , and buy-sell agreements that fund the buyout of a deceased partner or owner of a business . In many cases , the death benefit is used to buy some or all of the shares of company stock owned by the deceased -LRB- such as with a closely-held business -RRB- . COLI is also frequently used as a means of recovering the cost of funding various types of employee benefits .
Only minimal protection exists for annuity contracts under federal bankruptcy laws . Beyond that , the answer will vary by State . Usually annuities have some heightened protection level due to being considered essential for the debtor 's family to maintain a minimum level of well-being and avoid becoming a burden to the State . If an annuity is an IRA , Roth IRA or similar retirement vehicle , it can receive even more protection . Here 's a list of states that offer 100 % exemption of cash values from variable annuities for creditor claims : Arizona , Florida , Hawaii , Maryland , Michigan , New Mexico , Oklahoma and Texas . Kansas offers 100 % exemption after holding the product for one year and Louisiana after nine months . As always , consult a legal representative to see your specific rights in your state .
Life insurance provides cash at the time of death . Estate planning involves distributing assets at the time of death . Often the estate needs liquidity so that key assets do not have to be sold to pay debtors or taxes . In other cases , the business should pass to one heir and yet the parents might want to provide equally for other heirs . There are as many problems as there are families and life insurance can solve many estate problems .
Can you collect disability and unemployment insurance at the same time ? Yes , depending on who owns the disability policy . For a group plan offered through your employer the answer would be no . For an individual policy the possibility exists that you could collect from both . Personally I have never collected unemployment so I do n't know if they even ask about disability insurance . They may and collecting disability insurance might reduce unemployment benefits . You may have to look how things work in the state you live in .
The law of subrogration applies to indemnity . To indemnify someone is the attempt to `` make them whole '' again , or reimburse them for the specific losses they have incurred . Subrogation compels the guilty party to reimburse the victim , or the insurance company who paid the victim , for those specific losses . It also keeps the Insured person from profiting from a loss by only collecting from the insurance company , and/or from a lawsuit against the guilty party , up to the amount that was lost . Life insurance is not based on indemnity , so the law of subrogation is not applicable to life insurance -LRB- except in possibly some very remote circumstances -RRB- . Therefore , if a person dies from negligence , the beneficiary can collect on the life insurance policy and still collect from a lawsuit paid by negligent party .
Yes - by not impairing your credit score and profile . How can this occur ? When your auto insurance is cancelled or terminated for any reason it may have earned more premium than you paid . Your carrier will bill you for the additionally ` earned premium ' which is a legally collectible debt . If you do not pay this debt , their collection efforts will most likely show up in your credit report and history . Your credit ` profile ' is a significant factor that is considered in securing many things like insurance , financial contracts , loans , apartments , credit , etc. . Paying your debts -LRB- preventing collection activity which will be reported -RRB- definitely improves your credit by preventing it from getting worse . Do whatever you can to keep your credit score and profile as positive as possible .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Who Qualifies For AARP Health Insurance ?
AARP insurance is uusally associated with indiviuuals that are turning 65 or have already been on Medicare . AARP is part of United Health Insurance Company which also owns GoldenRule Insurance company thATwrites individual health insurance policies . UHC also owns a special needs company , Care Improvement Plus , whick writes `` special needs policies for individauls with heart conditiun , diabetes , COPD . If you have any pre-exisating conditions and have not applied for social security disablity please do so because no matter what yujr age is once you have drawn social security disability for 24 months you call qualify for Medicare . If you need health insurance/nedicare you should certainly speak with your nearest UHC agent
AARP is not an insurance company , However The Hartford offers discounts to AARP members on both home and auto insurance . The Hartford has been in business for over 200 years and is a highly reputable insurance company . Just to note : not all Hartford agents are authorized to offer AARP discounts . AARP qualified agents must go though certain training and be approved before being able to offer The Hartford 's AARP product . You should easily be able to do a web search to find a local agent who can offer Hartford 's AARP product . I myself am an AARP authorized agent in the state of California .
AARP is not an insurance company . They are an organization that sells the use of their name and logo to insurance companies . The fine print on the insurance products actually says that the AARP organization does not recommend or endorse the AARP branded insurance products . The insurance products with the AARP logo are often not a great value . But that logo does work because many seniors think of it as a type of Consumer Reports for seniors . It is not . If you study the offerings of the insurance products that use the AARP brand , they do not always compare well . The life insurance with the AARP brand often says that they do not guarantee rates . That is a very important feature that most seniors want and can all easily find with most life insurance products that are marketed to seniors . The Medicare Supplements AARP/United Healthcare are exactly the same plan as offered by many other companies but in many states you will pay less if you shop other brands besides the AARP branded one . Your search should be for good health insurance . Not for a Health insurance company that pays for an AARP logo on their brochure .
A Medigap Plan purchased through AARP means you will have Medicare Supplement insurance through United Healthcare . Medigap Plans A , B , C , F , K , L and N are sold by AARP . In some states , AARP has Medigap SELECT plans . For example , if you have Medigap SELECT Plan F or C , you get all the benefits of those plans -- except you have to use the hospitals in the network directory to receive full hospital care benefits . Applicants must be AARP members or live in the same household and share the same AARP membership number . It 's important to note that Medigap Plan benefits are standardized ; so , Plan F with AARP is the same Plan F with another insurance company . The difference is the price . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can help you compare an AARP premium to other insurance companies . Many people like to do their own research and sometimes will end up with an insurance company such as AARP because it 's easy to call up and enroll . However , this ` easy ' process can often times equate to a higher premium . By working with an independent agent , you can compare an AARP premium to other insurance company premiums for the same Medigap Plan you desire . This will make sure you are getting the best priced Medigap Plan . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
The insurance products that are marketed with the AARP logo on them are not the same in all states . United Healthcare sells the AARP branded Medicare Supplement in most if not all states . The only sell the AARP branded Medicare Supplement in certain states . For health insurance for those not on Medicare , I believe a limited number of states are now selling an AARP health plan for ages 50 to 64 . It 's better to research all the health insurance plans available in your state than to seek out any certain brand .
AARP Medigap plans are Medigap plans insured through United Healthcare . In short , AARP partnered with United Healthcare to attach their name to UHC 's products . As Medigap plans feature standardized benefits , the coverage under each Medigap plan is exactly the same as it would be if you purchased the coverage from another carrier . The main way the AARP Medigap plans differentiates themselves from other Medigap carriers is through their premium rating method . Most carriers determine their rates based on the attained-age rating method -LRB- your age at the time you apply with rates increasing as you get older each year -RRB- . AARP Medigap plans -LRB- insured through United Healthcare -RRB- are based on the community-rated method -LRB- everyone in an area pays the same rates regardless of their age - meaning an 85 year old is paying the same thing as a 75 year old -RRB- . Please note , the carrier also offers value-added services such as discounts for certain things such as eye exams and also offer a 24/7 nurse hotline , and silversneakers membership . You must be an AARP member to buy an AARP Medigap plan - membership can be attained during the application process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and comparison and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The AARP branded life insurance is actually New York Life . They just pay for the AARP branding . They go all the way to guaranteed issue so the only three questions on that are going to be 1 . What is your age ? 2 . What is your gender ? 3 . How much coverage do you want ? Anyone considering this policy would be well advised to keep looking . It 's probably the worst deal you can get . Most people can get a much lower premium and first day full coverage rather than accept the terms of a guaranteed issue policy . AARP often tries to sneak into the fine print `` Premiums are not guaranteed . You can not be singled out for a rate increase but we can increase them on all insureds . '' That is completely unacceptable . New York Life is wise to pay AARP to use their name to sell this . No one who reads it would ever accept that deal . But some AARP members trust the brand name so much they do n't read it .
No , AARP is a marketing organization aimed at seniors and only endorses health insurnance but does not offer health insurance coverage . In my area AARP endorses United Health One which not always has the lowest premium . One might ask why AARP endorses a certain product . It is because the company pays for that endorsement as they pay for advertising or any other marketing method . The consumer must always shop the carriers and the plans to get what best fits him or her . AARP will always mislead the consumer to believe that the product or servce is absolutely the best in price and value which may not be true . Do n't believe it all . Shop !!
AARP no longer provides long-term care insurance . Genworth withdrew its `` affinity marketing agreement '' to accept applications for a special plan of LTCi designed for the AARP members , effective June 1 of this year . Genworth will continue serving policyowners that have previously purchased the Genworth AARP contract and will , of course , pay all legitimate claims . AARP reported that they are not looking for a new carrier to take Genworth 's place at this time , but would be acceptable to negotiating with any LTCi carrier that might come forward with a proposal . The largest and perhaps most vocal advocate for those over 50 in the US , and a major source of educational material on health-related issues for seniors , AARP said that they will continue to provide information about long-term care planning and the roll long-term care insurance might play in such planning .
AARP is not an insurer . They are an organization that sells their name and logo to insurance companies . I do not believe that any insurance company that offers group health through employers does it using the AARP logo . With the health care reform it is less likely that any company would add that logo because they all have to operate on tighter margins . Paying for the AARP logo adds cost to the product and adds no benefit . If you are searching for group health insurance for your employees , you should call a health insurance broker and let him quote you several brands of insurance .
AARP Medicare Supplement Plans are insured by United Healthcare . United Healthcare pays a royalty fee to AARP to have them sponsor their Medicare Supplement plans and that is why you must be a member of AARP in order to apply for one of their Supplements . AARP sponsors the plan they are not providing the insurance coverage or paying the claims . After the Medicare Supplement has been issued and in benefit you do do have to renew your AARP membership if you choose not to in order to keep your Supplement .
The only way to tell if something is a Medigap plan is if it has a letter . For example , Plan F or Plan G. AARP is the brand name for the Medicare products through United Healthcare . However , they offer Medigap plans and Medicare Advantage plans so it 's important to understand what you are getting . There are big differences between the two . AARP & United Healthcare have great name recognition in the Medigap Plan & Medicare markets . United Healthcare is an `` A '' rated insurance company . However , the premiums could be higher in certain areas for exactly the same plan . It 's important to work with an independent agent who can show you AARP Medigap Plans as well as all the other `` A '' rated carriers in your area . We work with folks to determine which is the best carrier for them . We offer AARP and a lot of the other top `` A '' rated carriers . We never charge a fee for our service .
AARP does not offer any life insurance - they are only a marketing organization . They associate themselves with certain insurers and allow the carriers to attach their name to a product . For example , life insurance is typically done through New York Life while Medicare Supplement insurance is typically done through United Healthcare . One of my family members who is an AARP member gets letters in the mail frequently for life insurance with the AARP name -LRB- insurance through New York Life -RRB- . However , the coverage is age-banded and only carries the policy through age 80 - the coverage then terminates if they live beyond age 80 with no option to extend the program . Age-banded coverage means the rates change every 5 years as you enter into the next age bracket . They may have other life insurance products available with their name on attached , but that 's what constantly comes in the mail . If you 're looking for term life insurance , I would highly highly highly suggest consulting with an independent agent who can compare multiple carriers for you and discuss your medical history to determine the risk classification each carrier may consider you for -LRB- the risk class directly determines the premiums -RRB- . Shopping before applying is vital ! And there 's no cost to using an independent agent vs. going through a carrier directly . I would n't just buy on name as there are numerous carriers that offer term insurance who offer competitive rates . You can end up spending extra money that you do n't need to when you do that -LRB- that 's not to say a big name carrier would n't in fact be the best cost option , you just want to be sure you 're not overpaying -RRB- . The risk class is key to figure out first and then look at the rates for a given coverage amount/term length from there . If you do n't know what risk class you would likely fall under for a carrier , then a quote is nothing more than a guesstimate . Term life insurance is very straightforward . If you die during the life of the policy , the carrier pays out the death benefit proceeds . If you outlive the term premium guarantee period and and do n't want to pay the annual renewable term rates -LRB- which go up each year as you get older -RRB- , then you would likely either replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy or not have any coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
AARP is a marketing organization aimed at `` seniors '' aged 50 and older . AARP has endorsed health insurance plans , including major medical for those under age 65 . In some areas the endorsed plan is underwritten by Aetna in 2013 . Compared to the Aetna plans available in the open market , you have only a few choices . AARP plans are essentially identical to those you can purchase from an insurance agent . Premium savings on the AARP plans are illusory . In order to create a lower premium some benefits are stripped from the plan vs those available in market Aetna plans . Any time you are shopping for insurance you should compare rates and benefits across a wide spectrum and not just assume plans endorsed by a marketing association or retailer are lower priced and better values .
AARP , the American Association for Retired Persons , is a lobbying group tied to a marketing organization . AARP does not write insurance , but does `` endorse '' certain insurance products in exchange for a kick back or other form of compensation . It is unwise to assume any insurance product endorsed by an association is always a good deal . When I have compared plans recommended by AARP vs. what the consumer can purchase on the open market through an independent agent , I rarely find the AARP endorsed plans to be of good value .
In Georgia , Medicare supplement plans from AARP are generally lower than Blue Cross but higher than Mutual of Omaha and several other carriers . This is especially true if you purchase your AARP Medigap plan at age 66 or later . When given a choice in plan F vs plan G , most consumers will buy plan G , but they wo n't buy it from AARP . AARP does not offer plan G .
AARP insurance is uusally associated with indiviuuals that are turning 65 or have already been on Medicare . AARP is part of United Health Insurance Company which also owns GoldenRule Insurance company thATwrites individual health insurance policies . UHC also owns a special needs company , Care Improvement Plus , whick writes `` special needs policies for individauls with heart conditiun , diabetes , COPD . If you have any pre-exisating conditions and have not applied for social security disablity please do so because no matter what yujr age is once you have drawn social security disability for 24 months you call qualify for Medicare . If you need health insurance/nedicare you should certainly speak with your nearest UHC agent
Please note , AARP is not an insurance company - they are a marketing organization that attaches their name to insurance products that are offered by carriers . If your AARP prescription coverage is under a Medicare type plan -LRB- Part D prescription drug plan or Medicare Advantage prescription drug plan -RRB- , then your insurance coverage would be through United Healthcare . If your AARP prescription coverage is under a individual health plan for persons under 65 , then your insurance coverage would be through Aetna . It 's fairly simple to find out if your specific health plan will cover Cialis - you can do so by either 1 -RRB- contacting your insurance provider and asking them if it should be covered under your plan -LRB- the contact number is generally on the back of your insurance plan ID card -RRB- , 2 -RRB- reviewing the list of drugs covered by a plan -LRB- its formulary -RRB- by checking on your online profile through the carrier 's website -LRB- if you have one -RRB- or in your policy , or by contacting your insurance agent who sold you the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other insurance questions . Thanks very much .
Keep in mind AARP is not an insurance company . New Your Life pays for the endorsement and the right to market under the AARP banner . Just because a policy is offered under the AARP name does not `` necessarily '' guarantee a better rate than you can get elsewhere . AARP is a good organization and New York Life is a good company , all I am saying is shop and know what you are buying . Whenever you buy something over the TV or in the mail you risk getting hurt because it is very easy to be confused by some of the advertising that is done . Having a good local agent is almost always the best choice .
Yes . AARP offers at least two different types of life insurance . One type they have is a term life insurance policy that they sell to people age 50 or older . The rates increase every 5-years on that one . When you have a birthday that ends with a 0 or a 5 you will have a rate increase . -LRB- age 55 , 60 , 65 , etc. -RRB- if you live to your 80th birthday your AARP term policy terminates . You can then buy their other policy but the rates are much higher and are still not guaranteed against future increases . Another type policy AARP has sold for many years . It is a universal life policy where the rates are not scheduled to increase but it still has no guarantee against rate increases . They have sold this for many years . More recently they have introduced a whole life policy that does offer a guarantee against rate increases . It may not be available in all states yet . AARP is not actually an insurance company . They just market the policies for New York Life .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can You Lose Your Medicare Coverage ?
If you are incarcerated in prison for a length of time you will lose your Medicare until released. ; If you are on Medicare Disability and return to the work force and lose Social Security you are no longer eligible . As a rule however , you will not lose your Medicare Coverage .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
If you are incarcerated in prison for a length of time you will lose your Medicare until released. ; If you are on Medicare Disability and return to the work force and lose Social Security you are no longer eligible . As a rule however , you will not lose your Medicare Coverage .
Medicare Part A is premium-free for most people . You can lose your Medicare Part B coverage if you do n't pay your premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - the premium can be higher for higher-income individuals -RRB- . Most people will have their Part B premium withdrawn from their social security check or bank account directly -LRB- electronic withdrawal -RRB- so they do n't have a lapse in coverage . If you changed your country of residence , you may lose your Medicare benefits -LRB- Medicare generally does n't provide coverage when you 're in another country , with certain exceptions -RRB- .
If you have your life insurance through your place of employment - you lose it . This is why I always encourage my clients to purchase their own policy -LRB- not in the name of their employment -RRB- so that if they change jobs , they will not lose their life insurance . If one of the benefits of your job is a life insurance policy and you DO N'T HAVE TO PAY FOR IT , then it is fine to have - but remember , if you lose your job , you also lose this insurance . If you do pay for it , some companies will offer you the chance to keep it , but you must set up a payment plan or remember to pay the bill each month . To avoid the these headaches , it is recommended that you purchase your own policy and talk to an agent to find the best one for you . You can often get more for your money if you purchase your own anyways . Many companies out there with many different types of plans - some better than others - but all can be very confusing to the average consumer , so again , it is best to talk to your Agent about what policy best fits you and your families needs .
Often this question is approached by , how much can you afford ? I would like you to think of it as , How much can you afford to lose . I have been driving over 50 years . I have had one minor fender bender 46 years ago . Had I never purchased insurance -LRB- in California I have the option of posting a bond or cash -RRB- I would have saved approximately $ 90,000 . However , a recent accident involving a pedestrian struck in a cross walk resulted in a settlement of over $ 750,000 . I couldnt have afforded the settlement , so I paid the premiums . What can you afford to lose ? Buy the insurance that will protect you from those amounts that you can not afford to lose . If you can qualify for an umbrella consider limits in the $ 1-2 million range . In our lawsuit happy society that is not being overly cautious .
You can only apply for health insurance outside of the annual enrollment period if you qualify for a special enrollment period -LRB- SEP -RRB- . This goes for health plans both on and off the health insurance exchanges . To qualify for a special enrollment period , you must have a `` life-changing event . `` Qualifying events include : 1 -RRB- Getting married 2 -RRB- Having a child 3 -RRB- Adopting a child 4 -RRB- Fostering a child 5 -RRB- Moving out of your current coverage 's service area 6 -RRB- Losing your existing health insurance under certain conditions including : 7 -RRB- Loss of group coverage through your employer 8 -RRB- Your COBRA coverage expired 9 -RRB- You get divorced 10 -RRB- You come off your parent 's group coverage 11 -RRB- Your plan was terminated by the carrier 12 -RRB- You lose your Medicaid eligibility , CHIP eligibility , or similar situation 13 -RRB- Becoming a U.S. citizen 14 -RRB- Leaving incarceration 15 -RRB- Becoming a member of an indian tribe : those in a federally recognized tribe can apply for new coverage/make changes to their existing coverage once a month throughout the year Please note , voluntarily terminating your existing coverage or your coverage was terminated by the carrier because you did n't pay your premiums are NOT considered qualifying events for a special enrollment period . Please let me know if I can be of further Assistance . Thanks very much .
You can only apply for health insurance outside of the annual enrollment period if you qualify for a special enrollment period -LRB- SEP -RRB- . This goes for health plans both on and off the health insurance exchanges . To qualify for a special enrollment period , you must have a `` life-changing event . `` Qualifying events include : 1 -RRB- Getting married 2 -RRB- Having a child 3 -RRB- Adopting a child 4 -RRB- Fostering a child 5 -RRB- Moving out of your current coverage 's service area 6 -RRB- Losing your existing health insurance under certain conditions including : 7 -RRB- Loss of group coverage through your employer 8 -RRB- Your COBRA coverage expired 9 -RRB- You get divorced 10 -RRB- You come off your parent 's group coverage 11 -RRB- Your plan was terminated by the carrier 12 -RRB- You lose your Medicaid eligibility , CHIP eligibility , or similar situation 13 -RRB- Becoming a U.S. citizen 14 -RRB- Leaving incarceration 15 -RRB- Becoming a member of an indian tribe : those in a federally recognized tribe can apply for new coverage/make changes to their existing coverage once a month throughout the year Please note , voluntarily terminating your existing coverage or your coverage was terminated by the carrier because you did n't pay your premiums are NOT considered qualifying events for a special enrollment period . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can only apply for health insurance outside of the annual enrollment period if you qualify for a special enrollment period -LRB- SEP -RRB- . This goes for health plans both on and off the health insurance exchanges . To qualify for a special enrollment period , you must have a `` life-changing event . '' Qualifying events include : 1 -RRB- Getting married 2 -RRB- Having a child 3 -RRB- Adopting a child 4 -RRB- Fostering a child 5 -RRB- Moving out of your current coverage 's service area 6 -RRB- Losing your existing health insurance under certain conditions including : 7 -RRB- Loss of group coverage through your employer 8 -RRB- Your COBRA coverage expired 9 -RRB- You get divorced 10 -RRB- You come off your parent 's group coverage 11 -RRB- Your plan was terminated by the carrier 12 -RRB- You lose your Medicaid eligibility , CHIP eligibility , or similar situation 13 -RRB- Becoming a U.S. citizen 14 -RRB- Leaving incarceration 15 -RRB- Becoming a member of an indian tribe : those in a federally recognized tribe can apply for new coverage/make changes to their existing coverage once a month throughout the year Please note , voluntarily terminating your existing coverage or your coverage was terminated by the carrier because you did n't pay your premiums are NOT considered qualifying events for a special enrollment period . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! There are some reasons why taking a loan out of your 401k might not be the best option . Before doing so , please consult your plan administrator and be certain to understand the rules for your particular plan . The first reason is that you may lose the ability to contribute to your fund while your loan is outstanding . Some companies will disallow contributions or matches until the loan is repaid . That can seriously derail your long term growth potential of your plan . Other companies will deduct the loan payments from your check , reducing your flexibility with other payments . The second reason is that you lose your tax sheltered advantage . The interest that you are paying yourself on the loan -LRB- you are both borrower and lender in the transaction -RRB- is considered a taxable income by the IRS , and reduces your returns . It 's also possible that the opportunity cost of having invested that repaid interest could be more than what you 'd make having used it in an investment . The third reason is that if you were to God forbid lose your job , the loan amount is repayable within 60 days . If that is n't done , you are subject to a 10 % penalty on the balance , -LRB- if you 're under 591/2 -RRB- and are due for whatever State and Federal taxes apply , as it is no longer considered a loan , but an early withdrawal . An alternative to consider might be a home equity line of credit , if the interest rates and your equity allow . Some things to consider . Again , I 'd advise you to speak with your plan administrator and see exactly what your plan rules are . Thanks for asking !
You can sign up for Medicare Part D when you turn 65 . If you are already 65 but have not previously gotten Part D because you had credible drug coverage from your employer , and you are now losing that coverage , you can sign up within 60 days of losing that coverage . There are other exceptions in which you can sign up throughout the year , but if you do n't have a `` Special Enrollment '' situation , then you would have to apply during open enrollment , which is Oct 15 - Dec 7th .
You can only apply for health insurance outside of the annual enrollment period if you qualify for a special enrollment period -LRB- SEP -RRB- . This goes for health plans both on and off the health insurance exchanges . To qualify for a special enrollment period , you must have a `` life-changing event . `` Qualifying events include : 1 -RRB- Getting married 2 -RRB- Having a child 3 -RRB- Adopting a child 4 -RRB- Fostering a child 5 -RRB- Moving out of your current coverage 's service area 6 -RRB- Losing your existing health insurance under certain conditions including : 7 -RRB- Loss of group coverage through your employer 8 -RRB- Your COBRA coverage expired 9 -RRB- You get divorced 10 -RRB- You come off your parent 's group coverage 11 -RRB- Your plan was terminated by the carrier 12 -RRB- You lose your Medicaid eligibility , CHIP eligibility , or similar situation 13 -RRB- Becoming a U.S. citizen 14 -RRB- Leaving incarceration 15 -RRB- Becoming a member of an indian tribe : those in a federally recognized tribe can apply for new coverage/make changes to their existing coverage once a month throughout the year Please note , voluntarily terminating your existing coverage or your coverage was terminated by the carrier because you did n't pay your premiums are NOT considered qualifying events for a special enrollment period . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
To qualify for a special enrollment period , you must have a `` life-changing event . '' Qualifying events include : 1 -RRB- Getting married 2 -RRB- Having a child 3 -RRB- Adopting a child 4 -RRB- Fostering a child 5 -RRB- Moving out of your current coverage 's service area 6 -RRB- Losing your existing health insurance under certain conditions including : 7 -RRB- Loss of group coverage through your employer 8 -RRB- Your COBRA coverage expired 9 -RRB- You get divorced 10 -RRB- You come off your parent 's group coverage 11 -RRB- Your plan was terminated by the carrier 12 -RRB- You lose your Medicaid eligibility , CHIP eligibility , or similar situation 13 -RRB- Becoming a U.S. citizen 14 -RRB- Leaving incarceration 15 -RRB- Becoming a member of an indian tribe : those in a federally recognized tribe can apply for new coverage/make changes to their existing coverage once a month throughout the year Please note , voluntarily terminating your existing coverage or your coverage was terminated by the carrier because you did n't pay your premiums are NOT considered qualifying events for a special enrollment period . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! The best thing about an annuity is that in almost every case , you are guaranteed to get back at the very minimum what you put into it . Unlike the market , where you can lose your initial investment , most annuity companies will not allow you to lose your investment . You may or may not make the promised interest and returns , depending upon what type of annuity that you have , but you do n't lose the base amount , or the fact that it gets paid back to you over a specified time period . If you would like more info , please inbox me.Thanks for asking !
Qualifying Events for health insurance can grant special enrollment periods - situations that would allow you to sign up for a health insurance plan outside of the annual enrollment periods . To qualify for a special enrollment period , you must have a `` life-changing event . Qualifying events include : 1 -RRB- Getting married 2 -RRB- Having a child 3 -RRB- Adopting a child/Fostering a child 4 -RRB- Becoming a U.S. citizen 5 -RRB- Moving out of your current coverage 's service area 6 -RRB- Losing your existing health insurance under certain conditions including : - Loss of group coverage through your employer - Your COBRA coverage expired - You get divorced - You come off your parent 's group coverage - Your plan was terminated by the carrier - You lose your Medicaid eligibility , CHIP eligibility , or similar situation Please note , voluntarily terminating your existing coverage or your coverage was terminated by the carrier because you did n't pay your premiums are NOT considered qualifying events for a special enrollment period . If you 'd like to review options for your health insurance or have any other questions , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Qualifying Events for health insurance can grant special enrollment periods - situations that would allow you to sign up for a health insurance plan outside of the annual enrollment periods . To qualify for a special enrollment period , you must have a `` life-changing event . Qualifying events include : 1 -RRB- Getting married 2 -RRB- Having a child 3 -RRB- Adopting a child/Fostering a child 4 -RRB- Becoming a U.S. citizen 5 -RRB- Moving out of your current coverage 's service area 6 -RRB- Losing your existing health insurance under certain conditions including : - Loss of group coverage through your employer - Your COBRA coverage expired - You get divorced - You come off your parent 's group coverage - Your plan was terminated by the carrier - You lose your Medicaid eligibility , CHIP eligibility , or similar situation Please note , voluntarily terminating your existing coverage or your coverage was terminated by the carrier because you did n't pay your premiums are NOT considered qualifying events for a special enrollment period . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
That is a great question ! The best thing to do is go to the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- website , www.healthcare.gov and walk through the questions to see if you qualify . Start by entering your zip code and county , and follow the very simple prompts . It will tell you if you qualify for a policy . There are several qualifying events - gaining or losing a spouse or child , losing a job or income , moving out of a previously covered area , losing your coverage , even gaining citizenship or being released from incarceration . Give it a shot , and if you need help , feel free to click on my profile and contact me , I 'd be happy to walk through it with you . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
The higher your liability limits , the less likely you are to lose everything you have worked so hard to attain in the case of a severe accident . Your liability limits are really your protection against getting sued if you seriously injury or kill someone in an at fault accident . I always recommend my clients get at least 250/500 coverage , and although not everyone feels they need that much coverage , the real question becomes how much do you stand to lose if you have less than that , cause a severe accident , and get sued . Your house , your future earnings , your your savings are all at risk if you do n't carry a coverage high enough to protect your assets .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Take Out A Life Insurance Policy On A Stranger ?
Being able to take life insurance out on a stranger puts people at risk for being the target of insurance fraud , such as money laundering or murder . Insurance companies have cracked down on this mightily by requiring that there is an insurable interest in order for someone to take out a policy on another , that the insured person gives their consent , and that agents report any suspicious activity in regard to fraud .
Not anymore . That was an early form of gambling . People would take out life insurance on a crew member of a ship , hoping that the crew member would die during a voyage . You must have an insurable interest in the person and the person must cooperate with medical information and a signature on the application .
You must establish insurable interest and the need to indemnify financial loss at the death of a stranger like in a business arrangement where the parties may be unknown to each other , but they share business interest as in a buyout or bank financing . All that remains to secure the life insurance policy , providing underwriting approval , is the signature of the so called stranger .
No , you must have insurable interest , such as a family member , an employee or business partner , or a spouse . The individual must sign the application in your presence and be fully aware of the transaction . Any policy taken out without a persons knowledge is considered fraud and could be subject to criminal action .
You can not take out a life insurance policy on a stranger unless maybe they owed you money that would be paid back to you by the life insurance policy if they died . But then , they would not be a stranger , unless the loan was done through a third party . The logical answer is , no .
Stranger originated -LRB- also known as stranger-owned or stranger-initiated -RRB- life insurance is a plan or arrangement designed from the outset to put a life insurance policy into the hands of investors or speculators . The overall intent of each of these transactions , no matter how arranged , is to cause the issuance of new life insurance on the life of the insured for the ultimate purpose of ownership by one or more persons who have no interest in the continuation of the insureds life and have every interest in profiting by the insureds early death .
Being able to take life insurance out on a stranger puts people at risk for being the target of insurance fraud , such as money laundering or murder . Insurance companies have cracked down on this mightily by requiring that there is an insurable interest in order for someone to take out a policy on another , that the insured person gives their consent , and that agents report any suspicious activity in regard to fraud .
There are several ways to shop for Medicare supplemental insurance . You can go online , contact a carrier , talk to a Medicare representative , respond to solicitations by mail , invite an agent into your home . Most people buy from an agent in their home . If the agent only offers one plan , that is n't really shopping is it ? And who really wants strangers coming in their home ? If you have recently turned 65 you are no doubt inundated with mail solicitations . All of this is too confusing for most people . Buying without help is not advised . You can call Medicare direct , and some states have people who will answer your questions and help you decide . But how do you know if that person has enough experience to give you helpful answers ? This may be their first week on the job . Some think they will get a better `` deal '' if they buy direct from a carrier . Again , you never know anything about the person you are talking to , and how do you know they will be available to answer future questions ? Or you can go online . This is convenient but there are challenges here as well . Unless you visit a site from a local agent , you are probably giving up your personal information to a stranger in another state that will sell that information to numerous agents . This leads to multiple phone calls . Who wants that ? Another issue with online searches is this . You will only see a handful of options and will never see the lowest rates . We allow visitors to run their own rates from our site . They receive regular email notes with helpful tips following their initial visit . We send out personalized quotes to those who want them , showing multiple carriers . If you have questions , we listen and provide advice on the pro 's and con 's of each plan . And we allow you to decide and move forward at your own pace . All this is done by phone and email . You never have to get out of your pajama 's and get to pick the plan that best suits your needs and budget .
You must establish insurable interest and the need to indemnify financial loss at the death of a stranger like in a business arrangement where the parties may be unknown to each other , but they share business interest as in a buyout or bank financing . All that remains to secure the life insurance policy , providing underwriting approval , is the signature of the so called stranger .
That is a great question ! And the answer is no , you may not . The reason is based way back when life insurance policies first became popular . People would take out policies on other people and gamble on when that person would pass away . Often , these people had no idea that policies were taken out on them , or that their lives were about to be shortened . So policies were put in place to eliminate that practice . To insure someone now , you have to be able to show that you would suffer a loss , if the insured were to pass away . You ca n't demonstrate that loss on a stranger . Thanks for asking !
Who can you take a life insurance policy out on ? Well , there must be some sort of insurable interest present for the application to be accepted . An insurable interest could be between family members or business partners . You can not directly insure strangers without showing an insurable interest . Also unless a young child must also agree to be insured . You can not insure adults without their knowledge .
Great question ! The only way someone can take out a policy on you is if they have what is called an `` insurable interest '' . That means , they will have to suffer a loss , if you were to pass . A stranger , or someone that you just met could not , as there is no loss for them if you were to pass . If you do not remember signing off on an application for the insurance , the only way there could be a policy for you is if it was written while you were a young child . It would have to have been written by a close family member , -LRB- parents or grandparents in most cases -RRB- and you should be able to find out if you were to ask them . There are places that you can pay a fee to , and they will look for you , should no one be able to answer your questions . I hope that helps you , if you have more questions , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Anyone who has an insurable interest can be a beneficiary . For example , your spouse , child even grandparents . Brothers and sisters . A loan as a collateral assignment if necessary . It could be a business who depends on your activity to support the business or a business owner . Your Estate and Charities can be beneficiaries . Your neighbors can not . People who do not have anything to lose from your death generally can not such as strangers . This is a simple approach to your question . If you have someone specifically you are thinking about , contact your agent/broker . Feel free to reach out to the agents on this forum as well .
The simple answer is `` Yes ! '' Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is ethical . However , in recent years , because of some of the abuses , it has become more scrutinized in its uses . There are many valid reasons for using COLI . It could be very important to a company if a key person in their company died . In some cases , it would take months or years to replace that person with a specific skill set ; so COLI maybe purchased to offset the loss . It may also be used as `` golden handcuffs '' , where the life insurance builds cash value for a future date to pay executive retirement beyond a 401k . This can be done formally , through legal documents -LRB- the IRS even identifies it by code number much like `` 401k '' -RRB- . The unethical part came into play when companies purchased life insurance of people where they had no insurable interest -LRB- in other words would not be at risk of significant loss by the death of the person insured under the policy -RRB- . For example , CompanyZ purchased COLI on all of its 22,000 employees - from executives done to the maintenance.When a rank-in-file employee died , Company Z kept the death benefit , giving them a tax free benefit . The courts decided that Company Z did not have an insurable interest and required them to pay the family the death benefit . The policy was clearly determined not to be COLI but to be STOLI -LRB- Stranger Owned Life Insurance -RRB- .
The short answer is YES , you are able to purchase life insurance on the life of your brother . The basic rule ormeasure in determining the legality of purchasing life insurance on another is `` Insurable Interest '' , in other words , ` Do you have an interest in the continuation of the insured 's life ? ' . The blanket explanation of insurable interest is a relationship through love , blood and business . Therefore , you could not go out and purchase a policy on a stranger as that would be considered a wagering contract . Secondly , after meeting insurable interest requirements , the next guideline is that you are limited in the amount of coverage you can purchase based upon the insured 's net worth . Simply put , if you brother does not have two pennies to rub together , you may have a difficult time purchasing coverage on his life . Specifically to your situation , it seems that you have met the basic requirements to purchase coverage on his life . However , in order to do so , you will need his permission meaning that he will need to co-sign the application for insurance . With the sensitive nature of your current relationship , the best way to present the need for insurance to your brother is that you wish to have enough coverage on his life to prepare for `` final expenses '' . This would include funeral expenses , probate expenses if he has any assets and any other unresolved , secured debt that could be passed on to his estate . Do not feel guilty for your thought process , it is a very wise way to consider and utilize such a valuable asset to protect yourself against the financial burden that our loved ones sometimes create .
Renters Insurance is designed to reimburse you the current value or replacement value of items which are damaged due to an unforeseen event such as fire , water damage , etc. . If your electronics just stop working , is broken , it probably will not be covered . If it was broken by a stranger , I would look at your policy to see if that would be covered . As always , reach out to your agent or get a consultation with a reputable agency who can design the best possible coverage . You may have to look at a different type of insurance for `` broken '' items versus damaged from an event .
Generally , a policy may be considered void in the event of fraud . There have been many well publicized instances in recent years of insurance fraud concerning stranger owned life insurance transactions . Life insurance companies have been able to rescind coverage and the cases end up in the courts eventually . These situations are rare but they have been known to occur .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
There are several ways to apply for Medigap coverage . You can go through Medicare or apply direct to a carrier . That will get you a policy but you are on your own if you have questions before you buy or after the policy is in place . Most people will use an agent that specializes in Medigap plans . With technology , there is no need to invite a stranger into your home . Most of the information can be shared by phone , email and USPS . Almost 100 % of our clients are people who prefer to shop , compare and buy in the comfort of their home and on their time frame , not mine .
You can buy Medigap from a carrier , through the Medicare `` hotline '' , from an agent that comes to your home or you can buy from an agent over the phone and internet . If you buy from a carrier or through Medicare you are giving up personal service . Any questions will be handled by whoever answers the phone . If you do n't mind strangers in your home , you can invite one -LRB- or more -RRB- agents to come to your home and pitch you on the various plans . I have conducted business by phone and internet for almost 20 years . Most folks like to shop in the comfort of their home and the ability to make a decision in their own time frame . Over 400 clients ca n't be all wrong .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Life Insurance Test For ?
When applying for most medically underwritten life policies , an applicant can expect to have a blood profile and urinalysis ordered as well as vital signs taken by a parmedical examiner . The lab tests look at body chemistry . There are lots of chemical names and acronyms such as glucose , albumin , protein , cholesterol , liver enzymes , HIV , GGTP , PSA , BUN , nicotine , drugs and so on . The tests continue to evolve over time and can vary in some cases by insurance company based on age and amount . A life insurance underwriter is looking for abnormal results which , on their own may not mean much but when compared with additional information collected such as medical history , readings for blood pressure , etc. , it helps them assess mortality risk .
The life insurance exam generally collects samples of blood and urine which are tested for HIV , cholesterol and related lipids ; liver disorders such as hepatitis ; kidney disorders , diabetes , prostate specific antigen -LRB- PSA -RRB- and immune disorders . The exam also tests for the presence of alcohol , illegal drugs , nicotine , and prescription drugs . Blood pressure , pulse , weight , and sometimes an EKG are also measured at the time of the life insurance exam .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Medicare Part A will cover blood tests done as an inpatient in a hospital or skilled nursing or rehab facility , and Part B will cover blood tests done as an outpatient in any setting , when the blood tests are ordered to diagnose or monitor a condition or disease . Medicare Part A and B does not ordinarily cover routine blood screening . However , some preventative screenings have recently been added to the blood tests that are covered under Medicare part B : diabetes screening for those who are high risk for diabetes , one blood test every 5 years to test cholesterol , HIV tests for those who are high risk or pregnant , and prostate cancer screening yearly . For specifics see this brochure : WEBSITELINK
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
Medicare Part B does not pay for routine eye exams -LRB- eye refractions -RRB- for the purpose of testing eyesight and prescribing eyeglasses . Medicare does pay for eye exams in some situations . 1 -RRB- An annual test for diabetic retinopathy is covered annually for all those who have diabetes . 2 -RRB- Glaucoma tests are covered once every 12 months for those who are at high risk for glaucoma . High risk patients include those who are diabetic , have a family history of glaucoma , are African-American and over age 50 , or are Hispanic and over age 65 . 3 -RRB- Some people with Age-Related Macular Degeneration are covered for various tests .
Another possibility is life insurance that has violated the corridors of risk and has been allowed to become , or was originally intended to be , a Modified Endowment Contract -LRB- MEC -RRB- . The corridor of risk applies usually to universal life insurance type policies and it is the established maximum cash surrender value of the contract as it pertains to the amount of coverage and the age of the insured . The tests prescribed by the IRS limits what remains life insurance and what gets treated as a MEC . Regulations established in the 1980 's limited this risk of abusing life insurance in this way because people discovered that universal life policies could be a great place to stash cash through the payment of excess premium in the flexible universal life policy , of which the IRS did n't like much When a life insurance policy becomes a MEC it is still a life insurance policy for death . Any pre-death distributions , however , cause the policy to be treated more like an annuity and distributions are treated as income first . That limits the use of the funds during the life of the insured . Life insurance treats policy loans as the payment of the basis -LRB- premiums paid in -RRB- first , and this feature is lost when a policy becomes a MEC . In fact , a number of tax-favorable benefits of life insurance are lost . To determine if a life policy has become a MEC , premiums are compared on a 7-pay test that helps establish the amount of premium , after paying 7 level annual premium amounts , that would pay up the policy in the first seven years after the life policy was issued . Being subjected to the 7-pay test or MEC test can occur well after the first seven years if there has been a material change in the policy . However , despite all of the latter , a life insurance policy that is stuffed with cash and violates the 7-pay MEC test down the road , has specific advantages even considering the disadvantages . One of those advantages is having more cash value than the face amount of coverage at death so you should also consider whether this life insurance became a MEC due to some specific financial or estate planning course of action taken by the decedent . Money at death under life insurance made to be a MEC are usually deliberate planning moves to pass cash or benefits of cash beyond the next immediate generation . For example , Grandpa wants to give each grandchild a sizable sum of money but wants to avoid generation skipping taxation . A MEC that pays as a death benefit is a contract paid , rather than money given . Check it out but this is another possibility for life insurance with too much cash value !
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
When applying for a policy that uses medical underwriting , most life insurance companies test for smoking through both a urine test and a blood test on samples collected during the life insurance exam . If you are purchasing a policy that does not require taking an exam , neither of these tests are done .
No , life insurance does not test for STD 's , but the insurance application may ask whether you have an STD at the time you fill out the application . Life insurance does test for HIV antibodies , blood counts that may indicate infection , and other labs for conditions that may or may not have been sexually transmitted . But there are not tests done specifically for STD detection .
Not all policies need a blood test for life insurance . There are a number of affordable No Exam life insurance policies for those who do not want to take a blood test . That being said , the blood test helps the life insurance underwriters better see what health risks might be present . These include liver disease , diabetes , and high cholesterol , among others . The blood test also helps verify if the applicant has used tobacco or illegal drugs . When risk is calculated accurately , rates are assessed more fairly , and the security of your life insurance is strengthened .
Yes , life insurance does test for the byproduct of nicotine , called cotinine , in the urine and/or blood that is tested for a life insurance exam . Cotinine is a more reliable indicator of actually smoking a cigarette than nicotine is , as sometimes nicotine tests can detect second hand smoke . With tobacco such as cigar or pipe , a very few companies will disregard cotinine in the blood or urine as long as it it disclosed on the application and there has been no cigarette usage in the past few years . Other than that , the insured person who tests positive for nicotine/cotinine will be rated as a Smoker .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : Is the income from a life insurance policy includable for the Social Security provisional income test ? Well as you know , there are many forms of income , and all those incomes have to be generated or actually transferred over to the provisional income test to see whether or not Social Security benefits are going to be taxed by it . And of course , there are many forms of income , and most all of those forms of income somehow , some way make it to the provisional income test to test whether your Social Security is going to get taxed . But withdrawals to basis and policy loans of gain on a TAMRA-compliant , non-modified endowment contract kept in force for the life of the policy insured , that never actually is put on your 1040 . So the income is n't placed on your 1040 ; it 's not a taxable event . And the best part about that is it does n't enter into your provisional income test , so that your Social Security benefits stay tax-free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
I specialize in HIV Life Insurance and most of the people I have spoken to think it is always better to be tested anonymously when you get tested because if you test positive then the chances are it will end up in your MIB file forever . As far as a HIV test for Life Insurance if you know your positive then do n't waste your time on a company you know tests for HIV . It is not a requirement for every company . I actually offer a Group Life Insurance policy through a membership that comes with $ 10,000 in life insurance and you can buy-up to $ 100,000 in $ 10,000 increments . It is very affordable and the only requirement is that you work 30 hours or more a week and live in the USA and not in AK , MT , SD , UT VT , or WA CONTACT me for more info
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Velcade Covered By Medicare ?
Velcade is used to treat Multiple Myeloma and Mantle Cell Myeloma . In most situations , Velcade is administered in your doctors office or clinic and would be covered under Medicare Part B . If you have Medicare supplement plan F your share for the drug would be $ 0 . Other plans would require cost sharing .
Velcade is used to treat Multiple Myeloma and Mantle Cell Myeloma . In most situations , Velcade is administered in your doctors office or clinic and would be covered under Medicare Part B . If you have Medicare supplement plan F your share for the drug would be $ 0 . Other plans would require cost sharing .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare can cover INR testing once a month when certain conditions are met . Typically you 'll need to consult with your doctor and have them determine if it is medically necessary and confirm with Medicare that the treatment course will be covered -LRB- would fall under Part B - your physician insurance for outpatient procedures -RRB- . Here 's a link to a publication from CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- that provides a detailed explanation regarding INR testing , what specific conditions must be met to have it covered , and how Medicare covers it : WEBSITELINK Please note , under Medicare Part B , only 80 % of the expense would be covered by Medicare . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan , it may cover some or all of the other 20 % -LRB- depending on the plan letter you have -RRB- of the service expenses . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement , please feel free to contact me to see about qualifying for one . Medicare Supplement plans are standardized , meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of which insurance carrier you have the coverage through -LRB- only the price is different ! -RRB- Even if you already have a Medicare Supplement plan , I can take a quick look to see if a lower monthly premium is available -LRB- takes less than 5 minutes and I may be able to save you a ton of money on your monthly premium -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is very comprehensive health coverage for those that qualify . Medicare will cover a Total Knee Replacement as long as the Physician , Hospital , and any other healthcare providers are deemed as providers . You can check each provider out on the Medicare.gov website . Medicare Part A would cover the hospital expenses and if a Skilled Nursing Facility is needed for rehabilitation . You will have a deductible if you only have Medicare A and B . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of the out of pocket costs . Medicare Part B would cover the Physician charges and any outpatient services required . You have an annual deductible and 20 % coinsurance . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of these our to pocket cost . Medicare Advantage plans have daily charges and copays that vary for every plan . You should check with the plan to confirm that the providers are in their network and determine what your costs might be .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Obese People Get Life Insurance ?
An obese person may be able to get life insurance depending on their exact height , weight , and other health issues -LRB- if any -RRB- . Insurance companies have guidelines that they use to rate a person and these ratings dictate the premium that you will pay . A substandard rating will pay a higher premium than a preferred rating . It is important to discuss your overall health profile with a knowledgeable advisor who can provide guidance on the possibility of obtaining life insurance and what company will provide the best offer for your unique circumstances .
That is a great question ! This is one of the occasions where an independent agent is really worth finding . They can look at several companies for you , and look for the best company for you . There are some companies that will look at your weight seriously as a consideration , -LRB- too heavy , and too thin -RRB- some that give it some consideration , and some that do n't ask at all . After finding one of them , it will come down to your health , and what issues you have . If you would like some help , please do n't hesitate to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Yes , obese persons can get life insurance as long as they do not have any health conditions that cause them to be declined . There are policies out there even for obese persons with poor health . Several life insurance policies do not have any height and weight charts at all . Contact an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance to obtain a personalized quote for life insurance for persons who are overweight , obese , or morbidly obese .
Yes , obese persons can get life insurance as long as they do not have any health conditions that cause them to be declined . There are policies out there even for obese persons with poor health . Several life insurance policies do not have any height and weight charts at all . Contact an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance to obtain a personalized quote for life insurance for persons who are overweight , obese , or morbidly obese .
I can give you some examples from cases I have handled . I think you will be surprised . Many people assume they will not qualify for life insurance , and happily , they are wrong . It takes a lot . One fellow needed to purchase several million dollars of life insurance to cover a bank loan for his business . His business was a bar/restaurant . The night before his insurance exam , a few of his buddies came by to socialize a bit . They did cocaine . Of course , he tested positive . No insurance for him . He probably would have qualified for a guaranteed-issue burial policy . But the $ 25,000 would not have done him any good . He needed that bank loan . And he needed life insurance to get it . And you know what ? He didnt get the life insurance , and he didnt get the bank loan . He would have had to wait a few years before he became eligible again . Five years is the industry standard , but I probably couldve gotten it for him sooner . Another candidate also a business owner went to rehab for both drug and alcohol addiction . Unfortunately , he didnt schedule the necessary follow-ups after his treatment . Carriers were worried that a relapse would be right around the corner without the proper support system in place . He will also have to wait a year or two . Then you have people who have a number of serious illnesses that just arent sufficiently controlled . The combination of obesity , heart condition , diabetes , smoking etc. is wicked . Ive had people come to me with these factors in place , and then some . Has to be some measure of control . Otherwise , you look like a walking timebomb . These cases are extreme . Other cases seem scary but can be quite placeable . Pot smoking ? You can get a policy . Bankruptcy ? You can get a policy . On probation for a felony ? You can get a policy . Suspended drivers license ? You can get a policy . Travel to India , or South America , or rural China ? You can get a policy . Mountain climber ? You can get a policy . Deep water scuba diver ? You can get a policy . Of course , a number of important factors need to be in place , but on the overall , it can be done . Surprise !
Most people can get life insurance when they are overweight . If your weight falls in the morbidly obese category , and if you are under age 45 , it is harder to find coverage than when you are older , but there are a few options . Those whose BMI -LRB- body mass index -RRB- is in the obese range will have more choices . Contrary to what generally applies to those with normal weight , sometimes a No Exam policy can be the least expensive choice for obese individuals . Not having to take an exam can also be helpful if the overweight person has not seen a doctor in a while , as it takes away the risk of the blood test showing high blood sugar , high cholesterol , or other labs sometimes associated with excess weight . No matter which route you go , consulting an agency that carries a variety of products can be helpful , so that you can be matched up with the one that has your best price . Do n't neglect to inform your agent of any weight lost in the past year , as most companies will add back half of that to your current weight , when determining your rate class .
Most overweight people can get life insurance . If overweight or obese , they can usually get any amount and type of coverage they desire . If morbidly obese , there are simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies that have no weight limit at all ; however , they will have a low maximum face amount and only come in one or two types of coverage . Contact an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance to find your lowest price .
The cost of No Exam life insurance varies a lot because No Exam life insurance is use for so many reasons . Some people get No Exam insurance for convenience . In those cases , if they have very good health , the person may be able to get a lower price if applying for a policy that requires an exam . But to them , it is worth it to not miss time off work and go through the blood sample and exam . Some people get No Exam insurance because they are obese or have a health condition that does not qualify them for a medically underwritten policy . While the cost might seem high , for them it is worth it . Other persons can actually sometimes get a lower price with No Exam insurance than they could with life insurance requiring an exam . This can be the case with final expense insurance , overweight life insurance , or life insurance for persons of older ages . Part of the reason is that No Exam life insurance offers a minimum face amount requirement than most medically underwritten policies .
Medicare will pay for lap band surgery if the patient 's BMI is over 35 , if the surgery has been deemed medically necessary due to other failed treatment , if there has been a psychological evaluation indicating that lap band surgery could be successful , and if the obesity has existed for some time . One of the keys as to whether Medicare will pay for lap band surgery is if there exists a health condition related to the patient 's obesity . If the obese individual is not suffering from sleep apnea , type 2 diabetes , hypertension , or other weight related conditions , Medicare will not pay for lap band surgery .
You can certainly be denied life insurance with some companies due to weight , but that does not mean you can not get life insurance at all . There are a handful of companies that do not ask any height or weight questions , so all that matters is that your health fits their guidelines . Whether overweight , obese , or morbidly obese , there are affordable overweight life insurance options out there if you look in the right places .
If you are moderately overweight , it will not affect your rate much at all . If you are obese , the policy may cost double or more of what a policy for those with `` prefect '' weight would be , but the price is still very affordable . Being morbidly obese can restrict your choices to No Exam policies that have higher prices . In any event , overweight persons can get life insurance , and using an agency that specializes in policies like that can save you hundreds of dollars .
Obamacare is working well in California . Obamacare was intended to help Americans who could not previously afford health insurance get insured . People with bad health -LRB- heart disease , obesity , cancer -RRB- often were denied coverage or charged a very high premium . Now these folks are charged the same rate as everyone else . People with low income were often priced out of the insurance market as well . It was not reasonable to expect a person making $ 25,000 a year to spend 15 % of their income on health insurance . Under ObamaCare people making under $ 48,000 per year are eligible for premium assistance . WEBSITELINK - In this video I show you how a 30 year old earning $ 25,000 per year can get a policy for just $ 18 per month .
As a general rule , a `` tummy tuck '' is viewed as cosmetic surgery and is not covered by health insurance polices . However , obesity is becoming an increasing problem in our nation.This has resulted in a growing number of people who have reached health or life threatening levels of morbid obesity for which they have had either prescription and/or surgical treatments that result in extreme weight loss . In some cases the weight gain has stretched the person 's skin to such an extent that after their extreme weight loss following treatment their skin does not return to normal levels and the person is left with folds of skin which can , in some cases , become sources of medical problems themselves -LRB- e.g. - severe rashes and infections -RRB- . In these extreme circumstances the insurance company may agree that it is an issue of medical necessity that this issue be surgically addressed and the will approve coverage for the removal or lifting of this excess skin tissue . This has been the only circumstance where I have seen an insurance carrier approve what might be construed as a tummy tuck .
Being extremely underweight , or extremely overweight , can cause you to be declined for medically underwritten life insurance . However , you can still get simplified issue , or guaranteed issue policies , in most cases . The face amount for this type of policy is usually capped at $ 25,000 but some allow you to take more . Some policies are graded ; others are not . Premiums are based on your age , so it is impossible to give a number here . They are not cheap , but by shopping we can sometimes find some surprisingly low rates for those who are morbidly obese . If obese or just overweight , you can usually find a medically underwritten policy . These will run higher than someone with perfect weight and perfect health , but sometimes run no more than the perfect health person whose father had a heart attack before age 65 . In other words , you just need to have a personal consultation with an agent -LRB- phone or email is OK -RRB- who specializes life insurance for those who have weight issues , and let them find your best price
Yes , life insurance does usually consider a person 's BMI , or Body Mass Index , when assigning a rating to the policy . A weight to height ratio that indicates that the applicant is overweight , obese , or morbidly obese will hike the rate up a little or could cause a decline . There are some policies that do not consider BMI . Contact a specialist in life insurance for persons who are of larger builds to find your best quote .
Yes , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , major medicalhealth insurance policies issued on or after January 1 , 2014 can not deny a person coverage and must cover any pre-existing health conditions immediately . This applies to both the individual and the group heath insurance markets . Therefore , height/weight tables can no longer be used for underwriting a policy and a person can not be declined for coverage for being obese . To be clear on this matter , the provisions I have described above apply to individual and group major medical policies . Short Term Medical policies are not subject to the provisions of the Affordable Care Act and these policies often have a screening question regarding the weight of the applicant and in the case of these specialty policies an applicant could be declined for coverage if they are obese .
In some cases you may qualify for a covered gastric bypass under Medicare . Your doctor must attest that you are morbidly obese and other methods of weight loss have not been effective . Surgery can be an option if you are otherwise healthy enough to survive the surgery . If you are under 65 and morbidly obese you may qualify for SSDI and Medicare .
Some Medicare patients will qualify for gastric bypass or lap band surgery . Your doctor must have certified that you are morbidly obese , other methods of weight loss have been tried and failed . Surgery should be considered based on your overall health . Morbid obesity is considered a disabling condition under Social Security , so some on SSDI may qualify for Medicare coverage if you are under the age of 65
Medicare will pay for gastric sleeve , gastric bypass , lap band , or duodenal switch for weight loss , under certain conditions . There must be a health problem associated with being obese , such as sleep apnea or type 2 diabetes . The condition of being overweight must have existed for at least 5 years . You must pass a psychological evaluation , have tried at least one other weight loss program that has failed , and other illnesses as the cause of your obesity must be ruled out . You also need a BMI of over 35 to be approved for Medicare gastric sleeve surgery .
While this procedure may cost in excess of $ 10,000 , it is increasingly being viewed as a viable option for obese patients considering weight loss surgery . Coverage for this procedure can vary from state to state and certainly from one insurance carrier to another . So , you should certainly check with your insurance carrier and verify if this procedure is covered under your specific policy , to what extent , and what medical criteria must be met for this procedure to be approved . A procedure of this magnitude will not be the starting point in addressing a person 's weight control problems , you will have to exhaust other less risky options before proceeding to any surgical solution . AETNA , CIGNA , United Healthcare , some Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and other regional carriers are known to have covered this procedure . I do not believe that Medicare currently covers this procedure nor is it likely to be covered under most state 's Medicaid plans . Remember , this will have to be a medially necessary procedure , you will almost certainly have to meet the criteria for being morbidly obese and have not had success with other treatment methods before you should have any expectation of this procedure being approved by your health insurance carrier .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Who Buys Renters Insurance ?
People that want to protect their family and themselves from potential financial exposure due to an accident that they are deemed responsible for or due to other incidents -LRB- such as lightning or a fire -RRB- . Renters insurance provides protection for the insured personal property , personal liability coverage and loss of use coverage .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A landlord can not make you buy anything you do not want to buy , but they require that you purchase renters insurancewithin the agreement or lease that you signif you want to rent the property that they have to rent . Renters insurance is typically a very low cost insurance and if you combine your auto insurance and renters insurance with one carrier the discount on the auto may almost pay for the renters .
All insurance is based upon the concept of shared risk . You should buy a renters policy if you can not afford the cost of replacing everything that you own . You should buy a renters policy if you can not afford the cost of a lawsuit from personal injury or property damage . You should buy a renters policy if it is required by your landlord .
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Renter 's Insurance is not required by state law , but many landlords will require that you carry renter 's insurance as part of your lease agreement . This is because Renter 's Insurance comes with liability insurance protection , so , in some cases , if you damage the premises , they can collect from your Renter 's Insurance policy . That coverage usually applies for accidentally created fires -LRB- for example -RRB- . Fortunately , most people can buy Renter 's insurance for about $ 10 - $ 12 per month -LRB- it might be less and some basic policies only cost about $ 5.00 / month -RRB- . Send me an email and I can get you a rate !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Long Does It Take For A Renters Insurance Claim Due To Theft ?
The goal of an insurance carrier is to process your claim as quickly as possible . In a theft there would be certain steps that would need to be fulfilled . A police report must be filed . The insured would have to fill out an inventory sheet of items stolen . Also the insured would need to be interviewed . Upon completion if there are no complications the insurance carrier would issue a check to the insured for the stolen items . Happy Shopping .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
The most common homeowner policy forms of coverage written in the USA today includes the peril of theft - also called the `` cause of loss '' . All policies also include limitations and exclusions that may restrict theft to certain dollar figures or certain types of property to a certain dollar amounts . Generally speaking , the theft of an air conditioning unit is not one of the common types of property that is limited or excluded . You should not assume this advice is the same for policies covering rental properties as they are occasionally written without the theft peril due to the choice of coverage terms . In some rare cases theft is a cause of loss that can be bought back in certain coverage amounts for an additional premium on rental/landlord type policies . The DF3 or DP3 forms include theft for landlords but check local representatives for specific advice in your locality that conforms to local custom and practice . Either way , it is still a good question for your local representative who can point to the exact language or limitation in your insurance coverage and help you understand how to deal with the new exposure to the theft of devices and property that has aluminum , copper , and other metals of value from your property . .
-- > Normal 0 Renters -LRB- Tenant/Homeowners -RRB- Insurance policies will usually cover your personal property anywhere in the world . Of course , most tenant / homeowner policies also provide coverage on a named peril basis and theft is usually a specifically defined covered peril . So , in a general sense , renters policies should cover theft of your covered personal property while it is away from your home subject to the policys exclusions and limitations . Common limitations include : no coverage for theft from a dwelling under construction -LRB- often can be added -RRB- , theft from another residence you own or rent unless you are temporarily residing there , theft from the part of a residence you rent to someone , theft of boats , their equipment , trailers or campers , etc. .
Let me add one point . Theft and Mysterious disappearance are two separate things . So talk with your agent . Theft coverage will respond if there is evidence of a theft . For example a broken door lock or other evidence that someone gained access to your premises . The broader coverage available from some carriers can include mysterious disappearance which is basically that the insured item is not where you believed it to be and therefore has been possibly stolen or you simply do not understand how it disappeared . Mysterious disappearance is generally more expensive than theft , and is generally purchased in-connection with protecting valuable articles of jewelry , watches and furs or other property that have their own sub limits in a homeowners or renters policy . Read the policy relative to how jewelry , watches and fine arts are protected and if it does not sound like enough coverage talk to your agent .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance does not cover vehicle theft . Vehicle theft would be covered under your auto insurance policy provided you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy . However , if you have a renters insurance policy and some of your personal items were in the vehicle that was stolen they may be covered by your renters policy as long as the items are personal items and not part of the vehicle .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
Renters Insurance can be purchased Online ! Renters Insurance is designed to protect tenants from financial loss due to damage or theft of Personal Property and protection from cases of Personal Liability . In order to obtain a quick and free quote for renters insurance , you will need to state the amount of personal property coverage you desire , the personal liability limit and the deductible for the policy . If shopping for the cheapest possible premium , you should request the minimum amount of personal contents coverage that is acceptable to you , the lowest limit of personal liability -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- and the highest available deductible . Once you have the rate quote , you can proceed with the purchase of your renters insurance policy . The link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States may be used directly by Consumers . WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is important if you want to get funds which can be used to replace your material possessions which are damaged due to one of the events covered in the policy . Events might include water damage , fire & theft . If you have a lot of money just sitting in the bank , which you do not want , then perhaps you do not want Renters Insurance . You can also just take the risk that nothing will happen to your stuff although it may be a requirement to have Renters Insurance at the place you call home .
There are many ways to purchase renters insurance online . Most major insurance companies will allow you to purchase directly thorugh their websites . There are also websites that give you access to many different companies at once . However , there are some things that concern me about purchasing insurance online . As a former agent for a top 3 insurance company , I would become the `` agent '' for individuals who had purchased their own insurance online . I consistently found problems and lack of coverage when I recevied these clients . My recommendation is to reach out to a local independent agent and tell them you are looking for renters insurance . This will give you the opportunity to build a relationship with that person and have them make recommendations for certain coverages . There are many additional coverages that are available on renters policies from water back-up , to identity theft coverage , and specific coverage for jewelry , collectibles , music equipment , etc. . It is best to discuss these options with a professional so you know exatly what is covered and how it is covered . While you can quickly purchase renters insurance online , you may leave yourself with gaps in coverage , which can become costly in the event of a claim . The process is not that much slower within an agency -LRB- we frequently put polices in place the same day -RRB- and you can be confident that you have the proper coverages . If you do not feel comfortable with the agent you are in contact with , ask friends and family who they work with and find someone you truly trust . Even though you are purchasing a fairly inexpensive renters policy , take your time to find the right solution for you . In the unfortunate event of a claim , you will be happy that you did .
Renters Insurance will cover your personal property up to the limits of your policy . For example if you have $ 50,000 in personal property coverage in the policy and all your clothes and furniture were destroyed in the fire then you would be able to claim that as a loss . Renters Insurance only covers your personal property and does not cover the structure . It will also cover for losses for theft . Lets say you had your lap top from home in your car and someone broke in your car and stole the computer then you could file that as a claim on your renters insurance policy . Some renters insurance also covers for Loss of Use and Personal Property off premises . This may not be available from ever insurance carrier .
The desire to have Renters Insurance is one that varies in different geographic areas ; the decision to purchase Renters Insurance is either due to sense of responsibility , the requirement by the Landlord or both ! The mostaffordable Renters Insurance in New Jersey is underwritten by Stillwater Insurance Group . Renters Insurance is a very valuable and inexpensive option to cover the tenant fromthe results of a Negligent Act ; this would be covered by the Personal Liability section of the policy , this part is also not subject to the deductible on the policy . In addition to the Personal Liability section , thepolicy will offer protection for Personal Contents against a number of perils including Fire , Theft , Water Damage and a number of additional perils listed on the specific policy . Coverage forms vary from State to State . There is an online method to obtain a quote and purchase renters insurance online directly in multiple States ; the following linkwill be very helpful : WEBSITELINK It is our recommendation to select the highest available Liability Limit , the sufficient amount of Personal Property and a high deductible ; these selections will produce ample coverage with a low premium rate . For additional questions and/or assistance not available on the automated process , we recommend contacting a licensed professional for guidance .
Renters Insurance rates are based on two primary factors . # 1 - the amount of coverage required for two specific areas , and # 2 - the rating of the individual and location . Let 's look at # 1 first . Renters Insurance provides coverage for Loss , Theft and Damage for personal property of the insured , and a level of coverage for personal liability as well . The insured selects the coverage based on the amount of personal property they own . They can also choose to select either an Actual Cash Value policy or a Full Contents Replacement policy . The ACV policy will be less expensive , but will pay out less on a claim , as the ACV factors in depreciation of the item . On a Full Contents Replacement policy , the premium is higher , but the policy will usually pay the original purchase price of the item . Of course , both policies will subtract the deductible before paying out a claim . For # 2 , the rating factors , the insurance company will look at several items , such as age of the policy owner , how many adults are living in the property , if the insured individuals are smokers or non-smokers , the type of construction of the building , the safety and security features installed -LRB- if any -RRB- in the residence , any prior claims the insured may have on their record , and a few other items . The policy premium can be reduced based on the establishment of various discounts , such as Multi-Policy discounts . So the best answer I can give you is to talk to a licensed , professional insurance agent , and always get multiple quotes . Do n't just choose the cheapest quote however . Make sure you understand the differences between the underlying policies , how claims are handled and etc. . Just because one policy is less expensive than another does n't mean it is better .
Auto insurance policy does cover theft if the insured at time of loss is carrying physical damage coverage . The comprehensive portion of the physical damage coverage will cover any theft claim minus the applicable deductible . If the insured at the time of loss is carrying a $ 500 deductible and vehicle is valued at $ 10,000 then the insurance company will pay out a $ 9,500 theft claim to the insured . Hope this was helpfull
If it is included in your renters contract , renters insurance can be required . This is actually a very smart thing , both for the renter and for the landlord . The renters insurance will protect your property in case of fire or theft , and it helps protect the landlord in case of a liability claim . Also , landlord insurance is generally cheaper if renters insurance is required .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A 21 Year Old Get Life Insurance ?
Yes . The premiums for coverage depend on a number of factors including whether the 21 year old is a male or female , his/her medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , the amount of coverage the policyowner is looking to secure and how long he/she wants it guaranteed for . Many individuals look at securing a guaranteed universal life or whole life policy for an individual at such a young age as they can reasonably expect to live for a long time , meaning the rates are much much lower than someone who is in their 30 's , 50 's , 60 's , etc. , where the number of years of remaining life expectancy would be less . With such low rates at a young age , guaranteeing the premiums and death benefit for life is very affordable . Consult with an independent insurance agent/broker to see what plans are available and what structure would be best suitable to meet your needs . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like assistance with your and your family 's life insurance needs .
Yes , you can and in general terms life insurance is a financial risk management product that the earlier in life one purchases it the lower the cost will be . Without getting too technical there are essentially two types of life insurance ; term life insurance and permanent life insurance -LRB- often referred to as whole or universal types of permanent life insurance -RRB- . Term life insurance will be the least expensive and as it 's name implies it covers you for a fixed term or period of time -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- . Whole life insurance policies are generally designed to cover you throughout life and until death . Whole life insurance policies are more expensive but they often offer features such a cash build up , the ability to be paid up in full over a certain period of time but continue in force until the policy holder 's death . Most people purchase a mix of these two types of policies to cover their differing needs throughout different stages of their lives . For example , you will probably have a need for more life insurance during your working years when you are getting married , having children , have a mortgage and other financial obligations that you want to protect your survivor 's from if you were to pass away during that stage of life . Having a large amount of financial protection with lower cost term insurance for these years is an approach used by many people . They then often compliment the term policy with a lesser amount of permanent life insurance to make sure that if the pass away in old age that their funeral expenses and any outstanding debts are taken care of and that they perhaps leave an inheiritance to their spouse , children and/or grandchildren .
Yes a 21 year old can get life insurance . Of course there are qualification questions but in most cases there should be no problem obtaining life insurance . I have helped many young people around your age obtain life insurance . The premiums are great due to your age . I recommend you contact a local independent agent who can shop multiple carriers to find you the right product at the best rate to fit your needs .
Of course , a 21 year old can get life insurance and the amount should be determined by who is dependent on him for income if he dies prematurely . If he is not married and has little debt or mortgage then he may only need a burial policy . As a financial advisor , I only recommend term protection which is the lowest cost of all life insurance . A 21 year old who is working has a great opportunity because he is so young to begin saving in a roth ira and this will lessen his need for more life insurance in the future . Along with this he must not get himself into debt .
Why do you ask ? It 's an odd question . Have you heard otherwise that 21 year olds ca n't get life insurance ? Is there something about you that is unusual for your age ? Are you distinguishing 21 from 20 or 22 ? It is hard to answer your question without knowing what prompted it .
In most cases , yes a 21 year old can purchase life insurance . But just like anyone purchasing life insurance first there has to be a need in order to establish a face amount . Who will be in a financial loss if you die today ? It could be from a funeral expense , to a debt repaid to someone who counts on your income . Next is insurability . Not all 21 year olds can qualify for life coverage . There are always a number of factors to consider . Underwriters look at build , life style , occupation andlocation just to name a few . I recommend contacting an independent life insurance broker to find the best product for your unique situation .
Of course , a 21 year old can get life insurance and the amount should be determined by who is dependent on him for income if he dies prematurely . If he is not married and has little debt or mortgage then he may only need a burial policy . As a financial advisor , I only recommend term protection which is the lowest cost of all life insurance . A 21 year old who is working has a great opportunity because he is so young to begin saving in a roth ira and this will lessen his need for more life insurance in the future . Along with this he must not get himself into debt .
In most cases , yes a 21 year old can purchase life insurance . But just like anyone purchasing life insurance first there has to be a need in order to establish a face amount . Who will be in a financial loss if you die today ? It could be from a funeral expense , to a debt repaid to someone who counts on your income . Next is insurability . Not all 21 year olds can qualify for life coverage . There are always a number of factors to consider . Underwriters look at build , life style , occupation andlocation just to name a few . I recommend contacting an independent life insurance broker to find the best product for your unique situation .
Why do you ask ? It 's an odd question . Have you heard otherwise that 21 year olds ca n't get life insurance ? Is there something about you that is unusual for your age ? Are you distinguishing 21 from 20 or 22 ? It is hard to answer your question without knowing what prompted it .
It really depends on several factors . Your age , build , state of residence , occupation , policy type , health and lifestyle all play a factor in determining premium . For example a healthy 21 year old malefor $ 500,000 10 year level term is $ 14.51 per month . Where as a 51 year old in average health would cost $ 99.73 per month . I recommend an experienced independent life insurance broker to professional shop the market to find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
Cialis coverage depends upon the prescription drug formulary used by a specific health insurance carrier and the medical necessity for that specific drug . Having lost a family member to prostate cancer I sympathize with your situation . Unfortunately , there has been a fair amount of abuse of using the diagnosis of BPH as a screen to really get it covered for use for its effects on erectile dysfunction , that 's one problem you are faced with . Secondly , Cialis does have a number of side effects that can be problematic for men with other health issues . There are other treatments for BPH that do n't have as many side effects so these are probably preferred by your insurance carrier . This is an issue where coverage for Cialis can vary greatly from insurance carrier to insurance carrier . It may also be a case where your physician has not made the case for medical necessity for your particular condition . It is not uncommon to have an initial prescription request declined in these dual use drug scenarios and it may require more extensive communication and submission of medical records by your physician to your insurance carrier 's pharmacy management unit to request approval . But certainly a very strong case of medical necessity will have to be made to get a prescription for Cialis approved . Let 's face it , they 're not advertising it for it 's effects on BPH , they 're advertising it so 71 year old can act like a 21 year old again .
Yes a 21 year old can get life insurance . Of course there are qualification questions but in most cases there should be no problem obtaining life insurance . I have helped many young people around your age obtain life insurance . The premiums are great due to your age . I recommend you contact a local independent agent who can shop multiple carriers to find you the right product at the best rate to fit your needs .
A two million dollar life insurance policy can be purchased for $ 40 per month . But only if you are a perfectly healthy 21 year old non-smoker . And that rate will only be guaranteed for 10-years . Life insurance is sold at different prices to different people . No two people have the same health history , gender , smoking status , family history , etc. . Plus you may only need your term life policy for 2 -- years and your twin brother may want his for his entire lifetime . That will greatly affect the price .
A one million dollar life insurance policy can be purchased for $ 20 per month . But only if you are a perfectly healthy 21 year old non-smoker . And that rate will only be guaranteed for 10-years . Life insurance is sold at different prices to different people . No two people have the same health history , gender , smoking status , family history , etc. . Plus you may only need your term life policy for 2 -- years and your twin brother may want his for his entire lifetime . That will greatly affect the price .
A $ 1,000,000 life insurance policy can be purchased for $ 20 per month . But only if you are a perfectly healthy 21 year old non-smoker . And that rate will only be guaranteed for 10-years . Life insurance is sold at different prices to different people . No two people have the same health history , gender , smoking status , family history , etc. . Plus you may only need your term life policy for 2 -- years and your twin brother may want his for his entire lifetime . That will greatly affect the price .
Car insurance rates for a 21-year old can be very affordable , if you shop the right way . It 's important to understand that many factors determine the rate , including where you live , how long you have been driving , your coverage , the vehicle , and your driving record . An experienced broker is your best resource since they can find the policy that costs the least and has the best coverage . You will save time and money . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years , and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates to consumers .
House insurance rates for a 21-year old are typically low . AS a health insurance broker with 33 years of experience , I 'll provide a short accurate and direct answer . Prices depend on many factors , including your zip code , smoking status and type of plan . Your income will also impact the amount of subsidy . Utilizing an experienced broker will allow you to quickly view the lowest rates and easily enroll for coverage .
Age alone is not a consideration for rating an auto policy in California . Experience is the rating factor . There are several levels of inexperience and a 21 year old would probably find themselves in the latter two levels which make their premium a little less severe . Once the driver has completed eight years of driving experience they normally receive a standard rating and keep that until they are much older in which case the rating starts to increase a bit .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
It may . Whether or not your rate goes down when you turn 21 is up to the carrier . All carriers set their own rate tables , so it is a possibility that your carrier may of may not have 21 as an age break point . Contact your local agent they should be able to check with your carrier and find out if your rate will change at renewal after you turn 21 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Sells The Best Life Insurance ?
The best life insurance isone that is sold by a stable , A-rated -LRB- A.M. Best -RRB- insurance company , and isthe lowest priced for the amount and length -LRB- term -RRB- you need Sounds complicated ? Not really . To get the best deal , visit a website that offers term life quotes . There are many out there , but I like the QualityTermLife website because it lets you compare over 100 insurers , has a needs calculator to help figure out just how much to buy , and you do n't have to give your phone or email just to see the quotes .
The best life insurance policy is the one that is in force on the day you die . It matters little how much you paid for the coverage over the years . The real problem is knowing how much coverage to purchase . In the clamor to buy the cheapest term insurance we overlook the fact that very few of these policies result in a death claim . Buy insurance that is going to be there when you need it .
Many companies are excellent companies go work with . I know because I work with multiple companies , and hundreds of coverages in 50 states . The way to find the best company for the best fit your needs is to speak to a professional to determine . There are different products and coverages for everybody . Different forms of Life Insurance , too .
There are many , many agents who sell the best life insurance on the market , based on life insurance company ratings . The question is , who can you trust to sell you the best life insurance for you ? It 's kind of like looking for a home in a new city . You know there are some fantastic houses out there , and possibly even some that have the features you want , that will fit your budget . But will your realtor show you those homes ? You really have to trust your realtor to guide you to the best home that meets your needs and price guidelines . The agents who write answers on this website know how to listen and answer questions , one of the most important parts of finding your best life insurance . Many of us have access to scores of companies , so that we can shop around for you . At the risk of sounding self-serving , I would say you ca n't go wrong starting here .
There are lots of agents that sell the best life insurance on the market . Problem is the best life insurance policy does not come from one company . The best life insurance policy is the policy that protects your loved ones for the cheapest rate for your unique situation . I recommend not guessing but finding an experienced independent life insurance broker that you trust to professionally shop to find you the very best life insurance policy .
There are many companies that will say they sell the best life insurance . But , aside from looking at ratings from agencies like AM Best and Moody 's , there is technically no best life insurance company , and no best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are highly regulated , and different policies meet different needs . So the agent who sells the best life insurance is the one that finds the best policy for YOU .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Life insurance is not hard to sell . It 's actually very easy to sell . When you 're selling life insurance the main part of your job is prospecting for the right people . You are looking for the people who are aware that they need life insurance . Think of it this way . If you were selling swimming pools it would be very hard to sell them to 90 % of the people . But if you talked only to people who own homes , had yards and been thinking about buying a swimming pool it would be pretty easy to sell them . Selling life insurance is the same way . It 's very easy to sell to the right people and it 's impossible to sell to the wrong people .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
There are many companies that will say they sell the best life insurance . But , aside from looking at ratings from agencies like AM Best and Moody 's , there is technically no best life insurance company , and no best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are highly regulated , and different policies meet different needs . So the agent who sells the best life insurance is the one that finds the best policy for YOU .
Most agents who sell Term Life Insurance also sell Whole Life . The exception may be some of the `` term shops '' on the internet . Final expense policies are usually Whole Life , so agents specializing in Senior life insurance would carry Whole Life . These usually have under $ 100,000 face amounts . `` Captive '' agencies -LRB- where they sell products for one company -RRB- usually have good Whole Life products for persons looking for larger face amounts . So do agencies that sell multiple products , but you need to consult with a licensed agent who understands Whole Life . A good way to start would be to call and ask for an agent who can compare a couple of Whole Life policies for you in detail . If they are unable to do that , move on to the next one .
The agents who sell Long Term Care Insurance are licensed in Health Insurance . However , many life insurance companies also sell Long Term Care Insurance , and many agents who specialize in Life Insurance also sell Long Term Care Insurance . You can input `` Long Term Care Insurance Quotes '' in a search engine to bring up a list of companies and how to reach them , or a broker who sells their products .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
There are many , many agents who sell the best life insurance on the market , based on life insurance company ratings . The question is , who can you trust to sell you the best life insurance for you ? It 's kind of like looking for a home in a new city . You know there are some fantastic houses out there , and possibly even some that have the features you want , that will fit your budget . But will your realtor show you those homes ? You really have to trust your realtor to guide you to the best home that meets your needs and price guidelines . The agents who write answers on this website know how to listen and answer questions , one of the most important parts of finding your best life insurance . Many of us have access to scores of companies , so that we can shop around for you . At the risk of sounding self-serving , I would say you ca n't go wrong starting here .
You can get Whole Life insurance from a life insurance agency that sells all types of life insurance . They will be able to compare the prices and features of different policies and help you get the best choice for your financial situation . However , not all agents are experts at selling anything but Term insurance . You can ask them , when you call , about their experience selling Whole Life . Then choose the one who provides the best answer . This is a long term purchase and you deserve the best .
Anyone who meets their state 's requirements to hold a life insurance license and gets appointed with at least one life insurer can sell life insurance . The question becomes : Can one have a practice in accounting while selling life insurance ? In many states , the answer is yes . Some states do not permit accounting or legal professionals to be active while also selling life insurance . You can be a CPA , not be active in accounting and sell life insurance .
Perhaps this question is best answered by the statistical averages gathered over the years by LIMRA -LRB- Life Insurance and Market Research Association -RRB- : - Only about 7 % of agents that sign on with a single insurance company remain with that company past the first five years . - The percentage that remains in the business after departing from their first insurance carrier is around 20 % and each year that percentage declines . - About 3 % of all individual sales representatives that enter the insurance business remain in the business for 20 years or more . - The average age of a life insurance agent today is about 57 years old.It has been said that if you can sell life insurance , you can sell anything . As a career , being a life insurance agent can be very rewarding , but it is highly unlikely that life insurance will be the only line of insurance you sell unless you become highly specialized and work with other advising financial professionals as a team in the high-net worth market . Otherwise , you will find it necessary to sell other lines of insurance , notably health , DI , Annuities , LTCi , or property-casualty insurance -LRB- auto , home , liability , etc. -RRB- to pay the bills.Sometimes , insurance agents become securities-licensed and obtain various professional designations that allow them to practice financial advisory services and sales of stocks , bonds , and mutual funds . This is a fairly recent trend and usually results in the sale of life insurance being a rare occurrence due to all of the other responsibilities of being a financial advisor.Perhaps the most rewarding thing about being a life insurance agent -LRB- or being licensed to sell life insruance , among other things -RRB- is being the person that `` delivers the check '' to the survivors of someone that died prematurely and on whom there was a high level of financial dependence .
Who sells the best whole life insurance ? Well in my many years as both a captive and independent I can answer truthfully , a lot of companies . The best thing about life insurance is that there are many companies that occupy that top of the table where best could apply to any of them . You may see from time to time , advertisements from companies showing they 're best for 250k coverage . What they put in small print would be male age 35 best possible class . Why ? because they may not be best for females age 30 standard plus class . The best place to be company wise will simply depend on who you are , how your health is , how much coverage you buy and do you smoke ? Your answers may make the best company be entirely different than somebody else like your spouse for example .
Depending on your state the rates can be as little as 20 a month or much more . The rate factor is based on the area you live in and yes your credit plays a part . However if you have good credit they give you a preferred rate but if your credit is not the best in our state then you get the standard rate . They do not put you in a high risk if your credit is not the best . Also in our state being married or your sex plays no affect on your premiums . There are many online carriers but a local agent can sometime be more helpful and making sure you are properly covered and discuss your needs when you shop online only you never get to talk to the same person and they may or may not be able to sell you the best coverage at the best rate . our agency specializes in 24/7 service is an important factor also . I personally answer the phone . NEVER have to call an 800 number and never have to worry about your information being sold to other companies so that you are getting slammed with emails and phone calls from other carriers trying to sell you insurance . Al Local agent can also quote with 100 's of companies also . Unless they are a captive agent which means they can only sell one carrier . As always you can contact your State insurance commissioner and ask them about the carriers in your state including online companies and the complaints they have or have not received . Like our mission statement says Where you can simply Trust to expect the best . We compare rates for you and if we do not have the best fit for you we will recommend other agencies and carriers . It is all about service
Agents who sell health insurance have the license to sell disability insurance , as long as they are contracted with the carriers to do so . Many life insurance agents also sell disability insurance . Disability Insurance brokers are the most likely source , as they are able to compare prices of a number of policies . Some health and life insurance agents like us use disability insurance brokers to find their clients the best price .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Do Employers Offer Life Insurance ?
Employers can offer life insurance to employees and their families as a benefit . This helps attract good employees . Some people can not get reasonably priced life insurance in other ways , so it can be a valuable enticement . Employers can also deduct the premiums they pay for the first $ 50,000 of group coverage .
Employers offer extra benefits above salary as a way to attract people to come work for their company . In the case of life insurance , the employer will pay for a portion -LRB- or all -RRB- of the cost for the insurance . Some employers will provide up to $ 50,000 of life insurance coverage , others may base it on your income level -LRB- e.g. 1x income , 1.5 x income , 2x income , etc. -RRB- . It 's important to note that with group life insurance , if you leave the company or are terminated , you lose the coverage . This is why it 's good to also supplement the group coverage with an individual life insurance policy . Individual policies go with you regardless of where you work . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Employers providing some life insurance for their employees goes back well over a century when working conditions were often more hazardous and the workforce was overwhelmingly male . The death of an employee who was often the sole bread winner for his family would leave the spouse and/or children saddled with funeral expenses and a loss of income . Such situations were often viewed as harming the morale of other employees and reducing productivity as co-workers would often be taking time to raise money to assist the family of their late co-worker . It was also not uncommon for the family of the deceased employee to turn to the former employer requesting financial assistance which obviously put the employer in an uncomfortable situation . Term life insurance was an inexpensive way for the employer to address this employee need while enhancing employee loyalty and morale and avoiding workplace disruption . Since then the provision of employee life insurance became institutionalized as employee benefit plans became the norm . In fact , for many years it was not uncommon industry practice for the group 's health insurance carrier to require the bundled sale of some term life insurance when they implemented coverage for an employer group -LRB- a practice that has since been discontinued -RRB- . As such , employer 's providing life insurance for their employees has been a mix of employer 's looking out for their employees and their families , protecting their own self-interests , tradition and industry practices . Term life insurance still remains one of the least expensive benefits an employer can provide to their employees that often has the most emotional impact when it is actually needed .
There are a few reasons for an employer offering life insurance to their employees . One good benefits help attract and retain good employees . Employee training is one of the most expensive tasks employers must do , so turnover is costly . Group life insurance benefits are among the most affordable benefits on the market . One of the best reasons I know is according to LIMRA 70 % of hard working Americans admit if they died today , their family would be in financial trouble because of being uninsured or underinsured . It is just good business .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
No American employer is required to provide health insurance to their employees . What the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- imposes is an employer mandate that employers of certain sizes must offer their employees health insurance that meets certain minimum essential benefit coverage requirements and an affordability level to the employee . If such an employer chooses not to offer group health insurance to their employees the employer will be subject to an employer mandate tax penalty charged on a per employee basis . In 2015 employers with 100 + employees will be subject to this requirement with the size threshold dropping to 50 + employees in 2016 . Employers with less than 50 employees are not required to offer coverage . While on the face of it the employer mandate would seem to be an incentive for larger employers to offer health insurance to their employees it 's true effects are yet to be seen and are quite debatable . For example , the cost of the tax penalty is generally far less than the cost of insuring an employee thus perhaps creating an incentive to take the lower cost of the tax penalty and to send your employees to the health insurance marketplaces to buy their own coverage .
Some will and some wo n't . Employer 's offer health insurance and other benefits to attract and retain quality employees , reduce turnover and to reduce absenteeism . Also , many employer 's feel a moral obligation to offer health insurance and employer sponsored health insurance is a deductible business expense so it does offer tax advantages . That said , with the introduction of the health insurance marketplaces and advanced premium tax subsidies for individual health insurance under Obamacare , these have added a new consideration for some employers . Depending upon the overall income levels of a particular employer 's workforce -LRB- a business with a lot of low to moderate income employees -RRB- it is possible that offering group health insurance could now be a disadvantage to many employees . This is because they may qualify for premium subsidies in the government marketplaces that actually make the cost of insurance less for them than having it provided by their employer . This is a very complicated issue that has a unique answer for each employer . If you would like an analysis of whether offering or continuing to offer group health insurance is right for your workforce please feel free to contact me .
I believe what you are referring to is what 's called `` split-dollar '' life insurance . This type of life insurance is generally used for businesses to help an employee purchase coverage - it can be used as a form of deferred compensation or as an incentive for the employee to work at that company . The idea of a split-dollar policy is to share or `` split '' aspects of the program between two parties -LRB- again - generally employer and employee -RRB- , including ownership , premiums , death benefits , cash value , and dividends . The advantages for the employee in doing this type of policy is to get the coverage they need to protect their family , but at a cheaper price . When the employer is paying premiums , the employee may be able to reduce their income tax liability when in higher tax brackets . Upon the death of the employee , the proceeds can be used to provide for estate liquidity . So why would the employer do all of this rather than make the employee buy an individual policy on their own ? In short , tax purposes . While it allows the employer to provide benefits to their employee with low costs , the portion of premiums the employer pays can be deducted for tax purposes . Upon the death of the employee , the employer is paid an amount equal to the sum of premiums paid on behalf of the deceased employee . These plans feature a good amount of flexibility for the employer as well , as they can modify or terminate the program at their discretion .
In simple terms , a COBRA health insurance is a short-term continuation of the exact same group health plan you had with your employer prior to termination from that job . So , if you liked the coverage provided by the plan prior to termination , you will still like the coverage provided by the plan under COBRA administration because it is the same plan . What you may not like is the cost under COBRA administration . Many people incorrectly assume that COBRA rates are excessively higher than the rates you paid while employed . This is incorrect . By law , your insurance rates under COBRA can not exceed 102 % of the rate you were paying before termination . So , why does the COBRA premium seem so much higher than the premium prior to termination ? The answer is your employer 's contribution to your health insurance . While you were employed , your employer was definitely paying a portion of yours , the employee 's , health insurance premium . If you worked for a `` benefits rich '' employer , they may have been paying all your premium and even contributing some to your dependents ' coverage . Under COBRA , the employer no longer is responsible to contribute anything to your health insurance premium . You are therefore responsible for 100 % of your portion of the premium as well as that of your dependents . That is why the COBRA cost is more than you were seeing while employed . So , the real question then becomes is it cheaper for me to continue with my current group health plan under COBRA , or is there a better alternative in the personal health insurance marketplace . The only way to answer that question is to solicit quotes from personal health insurers .
Yes . Absent a collective bargaining agreement with a labor union , which are increasingly rare , an employer makes a voluntary decision to offer health insurance and other benefits to their employees . There has never been a legal requirement in our nation for an employer to offer health insurance to their employees . The Affordable Care Act contains provisions that can apply tax penalties to employers above certain group sizes for not offering health insurance or the approved level of coverage and it offers inducements in the form of tax credits to smaller employers to provide health insurancebut even this law does not force an employer to provide health insurance to their employees . So , generally speaking , an employer is free to not offer health insurance to their employees or to terminate an existing group health insurance plan that they have had in effect . Indeed , the higher costs imposed by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have already had the perverse effect of pushing some employers to the decision to cancel their group health plans .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
This is very unusual but not unheard of and technically legal as I understand it . In my nearly 30 years of being associated with employer 's group health plans I have had many clients who require a drug screen as a condition of employment but I have never had one that charged a prospective employee to pay for it . Do they offer to reimburse you if you pass the drug screening ? Really a drug screen should only be the last step before you are hired or you are given a conditional offer of employment based upon passing the drug screen . With today 's technology $ 300 seems an excessive amount to be charged just for a drug screening , is there a credit check and criminal background check also included in this ? Traditionally such practices have been a cost of doing business for the employer -LRB- and these tests can be required of the employer if the have Federal or State contracts they have to comply with as part of their doing business with the government -RRB- and not passed onto a job applicant . Personally , I would look for employment elsewhere before I would pay a prospective employer for the `` privilege '' of getting a job offer . If they will pick your pocket up front like that I can only imagine what a delightful work environment they must provide .
As of today no one has to offer health insurance ! That will change on January 1 , 2015 when employers with 100 or more employees will have to offer health insurance to their employees or pay a penalty -LRB- tax -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- requires employers to offer health insurance to employees and dependents that are children but does not require employers to offer health insurance to spouses of employees . On January 1 , 2016 employers with 50-99 employers will be required to offer health insurance .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
Great question ! Employers offer health insurance as a benefit because it is a way to attract and keep good employees . That is why there are benefit packages , paid vacations , and 401ks . If all they had to offer was wages , people would move from job to job even more than they do already . A good insurance and benefit plan can be a great incentive to stay . The companies buy a policy for the employees , they own it , and often pay a significant part of the employees ' costs . That is why when you leave a job , the insurance does not go with you - you do n't own it , like you would if you had purchased the policy on your own . Any more questions , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to answer ! Thanks for asking !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
No one is required to offer health insurance , but employers are strongly encouraged to offer it as a way of attracting people to come work for them . Depending on how many employees there are for a given company , the employer may be subject to employer shared responsibility payments if they do n't offer group coverage and meet enrollment requirements . Employers also often offer group health insurance because they can get certain tax deductions and tax credits for doing so and enrolling employees .
There is a chance that this question is asking `` Why do employers offer life insurance to employees '' . If that is the intent of the question , the response is to attract and retain qualified employees . Companies that offer life insurance as an employee retention tool provide group plans . In group plans the employer owns the contract , and pays the premium . All employees are automatically covered . That means people with poor health or preexisting conditions can get coverage .
No one is required to offer health insurance , but employers are strongly encouraged to offer it as a way of attracting people to come work for them . Depending on how many employees there are for a given company , the employer may be subject to employer shared responsibility payments if they do n't offer group coverage and meet enrollment requirements . Employers also often offer group health insurance because they can get certain tax deductions and tax credits for doing so and enrolling employees . If you want to look into setting up a group health plan to offer your employees -LRB- or want to review your existing coverage to see if something better is available -RRB- , you want to work with an experienced health insurance broker . There 's many moving parts to group coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of the products available and can help design a policy that is suitable to your needs , your budget , and will offer great coverage to your staff . Please let me know if I can be of assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A 70 Year Old Get Life Insurance ?
That is a great question ! Absolutely you can . In fact , there are probably more policies available for people aged 50-75 than there are any others . Younger people do n't believe that their ends will ever come , while age brings wisdom , in many cases . There are a ton of great options , and a good agent can help you find an affordable policy with the coverage that you can safely afford . If you 'd like some more details , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thank you for asking !
Absolutely . Seniors can get life insurance . At 70 , you may still have young dependents who you support or are putting through college . You may want a lot of coverage to protect an estate from inheritance taxes or just enough for final expenses so that you need n't burden your family . Here are your quotes for 10 years , $ 500,000 , excellent health . Around $ 3700/year . WEBSITELINK -LRB- copy and paste into your browser 's address bar -RRB- For other health status , term -LRB- length -RRB- , or amount you can use the quote engine at WEBSITELINK
Actually , people as old as 90 can buy life insurance . They can buy as much as they need as long as the amount is financially justifiable . There are carriers who specialize in older age groups . They have a sophisticated understanding of certain medical conditions that affect primarily people when they are older . One example would be Parkinson 's , and another would be cognitive impairment . Because they have a high comfort level with these types of risks , the pricing can be much more affordable than one would think .
It actually is easier to get life insurance at age 70 than it is at age 30 . That is because there are so many policies that offer final expense coverage , and most of them have a minimum age requirement of 40-50 years old . Some of these are guaranteed issue , meaning there are no health questions whatsoever , and you can not be denied . Most have a maximum age 75-85 . So yes , agencies like ours , that carry many policies for seniors , can offer an assortment of prices . We can also find you medically underwritten policies in larger face amounts , for purposes other than funeral , memorial service , etc. .
A million dollar policy for a 70 year old preferred non-smoker will be around $ 9785 10 year term , $ 14510 15 year term , $ 21600 for 20 year term , $ 23828 Guaranteed UL . A million dollar policy for a 70 year old standard non-smoker will be around $ 12825 10 year term , $ 22110 15 year term , $ 25930 for 20 year term , $ 32840 Guaranteed UL .
The reason that life insurance premiums go up with age is because mortality rates go up the longer someone lives . When someone buys a 10 year term life insurance policy at age 20 , the rates will not be much higher than at age 30 , because the death rate for 30-40 year old persons does not vary much . However , the rates for a 10 year term policy will be much higher for a 60 year old person than a 50 year old person , because mortality rates go up a lot between ages 60-70 , especially for men .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
There are far fewer companies that will offer term life insurance to a 70 year old person than to a 40 year old , but they do exist . Most often , at that age the policy is a universal life policy that is guaranteed not to lapse for x number of years at a guaranteed level premium . The rates are as low as term rates , and you have the option of dumping in more money to keep the policy in effect longer , which is an option you do not get with term insurance .
According to LIMRA , Life Insurance Marketing and Research Association , the nations leading expert on life insurance sales , the average person has a face amount of $ 165,000 in life insurance . Other interesting statistics on the subject find that 70 % of American households admit they would have financial difficulties if the primary wage earner were to die . So , 7 out of 10 people admit they do n't have enough life insurance in force . Out of this 70 % , 30 % of Americans have no life insurance at all , even though we are all guaranteed to die someday . Life insurance is just too important and affordable not to have enough for those loved ones left behind to pick up the pieces . For example , a young healthy 25 year old female can purchase $ 500,000 in term life insurance for as low as $ 12.62 per month . It is the most affordable insurance product on the market and yet one of the most under purchased for the level needed .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
First understand there are two basic types of disability insurance . The first is a short term disability plan . These benefits are usually a fixed amount not to exceed 70 % of your current income and can start paying almost immediately . These short term plans can pay daily , weekly or monthly but for a shorter period of time usually a few months to up to one year . The second type of disability is long term disability plans . These benefits have a longer elimination period usually 30-60-90-180-360 days before benefits commence but will pay for years or up to age 67 years old . Most long term plans will pay up to 70 % of your current income at time of claim .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
The mortality revolution has been moving the conventional lines of age limitations on many products , services and even retirement start dates to age 70 . There are life insurance companies that issue to age 90 . But a 90 year old will more than likely have health conditions to consider and youll need to justify the coverage and the competency of the 90 year old insured will be scrutinized by the life insurance company .
A quick look in my manual shows that about the only new contract available to a person over 70 years old with my company is a single premium whole life . Term insurance is not issued after age 70 . The single premium whole life might be an interesting concept to consider as it allows you to make a single deposit now and take care of bequests or debts or final expenses when you pass .
The short answer is `` yes '' , however at this age you may find it a much better alternative to purchase a permanent policy . First , someone 70 will generally have an objective of having coverage last for a lifetime instead of a period of time . Unless the 70 year old has borrowed money or some other situation that requires term , its probably a bad idea .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
It would depend on your Health and if you have ever used tobacco products . A 70 year old in perfect health who has never used tobacco could currently get a $ 200k 20 year level term policy for as low as $ 4111 per year . But this would be a `` best case scenario '' figure . But if they are in poor health it could be double that or even more . And if they currently use -LRB- or have recently used -RRB- tobacco it would double that best case scenario figure as well . Most likely for a $ 200k 20 year level term it would be between $ 4500 - $ 7000 depending on health , and that is for a non-smoker . But the amount of Death Benefit and the type of policy will ultimately dictate premiums , along with health & tobacco use .
Younger people are eligible for more coverage than seniors , when just income is taken into consideration . Many policies will allow a younger person to take out at least 25 times their annual income in life insurance coverage , whereas the amount that a 70 + year old person can financially qualify for is often 5 times their annual income . However , assets enter into the financial justification , as well as income , and this can enlarge considerably the amount of life insurance older persons can get .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Sell A Car Without Insurance ?
You should be able to sell a car without insurance . But do n't let the potential buyer drive the vehicle ! Otherwise , you couldpotentiallyhave some financial issues to deal with . The buyer of the vehicle should always have current car insurance , so they can easily add the car to their policy at the time of purchase . And , when selling a vehicle , do n't take cash or a check . Insist on a certified bank check and verify that the check has cleared .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
You should be able to sell a car without insurance . But do n't let the potential buyer drive the vehicle ! Otherwise , you couldpotentiallyhave some financial issues to deal with . The buyer of the vehicle should always have current car insurance , so they can easily add the car to their policy at the time of purchase . And , when selling a vehicle , do n't take cash or a check . Insist on a certified bank check and verify that the check has cleared .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
Life insurance is not hard to sell . It 's actually very easy to sell . When you 're selling life insurance the main part of your job is prospecting for the right people . You are looking for the people who are aware that they need life insurance . Think of it this way . If you were selling swimming pools it would be very hard to sell them to 90 % of the people . But if you talked only to people who own homes , had yards and been thinking about buying a swimming pool it would be pretty easy to sell them . Selling life insurance is the same way . It 's very easy to sell to the right people and it 's impossible to sell to the wrong people .
Boy is that the million dollar question of the day ! There are a whole lot of folks asking that same question ... Without knowing your financial status or how near/far into retirement that you are , I can not give you a specific plan of attack , but there are some things that you can start doing immediately that will help . The first is downsize . Move to a smaller house , or less expensive area . Sell off the extra car , unneeded belongings , anything that is no longer really close to your heart , and can generate some cash . Do the same thing with your debt . Tighten the belt and pay off every high interest credit card or loan that you have . Save that interest you 'd be paying for food and electricity . Take the money that you 've found , and invest it in an investment vehicle that will provide you with an income . The second is prioritize . What are you doing that you really could be doing without ? Are you eating out 12 times a week ? Is that more important than saving for your retirement ? Things like lottery tickets , entertainment , take a second and ask yourself if they 're worth the cost . I certainly am not telling you to stop enjoying life , but I 'd ask you to consider if there is a cheaper way to do so -LRB- And lottery tickets I will tell you to stop . You lose far more money than you will ever win -RRB- . The third is to re-evaluate your current savings plan . Can you re-allocate your investments ? Do you have any annuitized investments that you can be assured to not outlive ? Can you shuffle investments that may have under-performed into better ones ? Lastly , are there ways to increase your income ? Can one of you put off taking SSI benefits , -LRB- The longer that you delay the start of the payments , the larger those lifetime payments will be -RRB- , work longer , or use a hobby to generate an income ? If you like gardening , for example , can you grow vegetables to sell , or flowers to arrange for sale ? Using something that you love to do anyway as a secondary source of income is as emotionally rewarding as it is financially rewarding . I hope that there was something in my answer that will help you , have faith . Matthew tells us that God provides for our daily needs , and if you can honestly say that He has done so so far , it 's a safe bet He will continue to . Thanks for asking !
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Driving without car insurance can have both legal and financial impacts upon your life . Caveat , this is geared towards Michigan drivers . Financially : if you get into a collision and are negligent , you could be sued for physical damages to the other driver/passengers . Without insurance you will be on the hook for the entire judgment against you . Furthermore , if you are driving a new car you will either be out the money you spent on the car , or you will owe the leasing company or lender the value of the car . Legal : in Michigan driving without proof of no-fault insurance can result in a $ 500 ticket and three points on your license . So you will be out $ 500 immediately , and a huge increase in your insurance upon renewal . This is assuming you will still have the same insurance and not get a non-renewal notice . I hope this helps .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Yes , absolutely you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . Without it you would not be following the regulations set by New York Department of Financial Services - Insurance Industry . Before obtaining a license to sell life insurance you must study , take a practice -LRB- proctored -RRB- exam and pass . Then , you must pass the ` real exam ' in order to get a license to sell life insurance in New York .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
If you have an insurance policy and sell your car because you purchased a new car you can easily change cars on your policy . Simply call your insurance agent and notify them of the sale of the old car and purchase on the new car and the agent can update your policy . Rates will adjust to take into account the car you chose on a pro-rated basis .
Progressive is mainly known for car insurance . All or most car insurance companies WILL sell you life insurance but it 's not their main focus . And if you shop and compare it to companies that are mainly focused on life insurance , it is unlikely that you would decide to go with them or any other car insurance company for your life insurance . That would be like ordering a hamburger at Red Lobster . They could probably sell you one but it 's not really what they do .
Coverage follows the car . Example 1 : If you were given a car -LRB- loaned -RRB- and the car has no insurance , you can buy insurance on the car and your insurance will be primary . Another option , someone helped you to buy a car . For example your credit score is n't good enough to finance , so a friend of yours signed under your loan as a primary payor . You can get insurance under your name and even list your friend on the policy as a loss payee . In this case , we always suggest you get a loan gap coverage : the difference between the car 's actual cash value and the amount still owned on it . Example 2 : The car you are loaned has insurance . You can buy a policy under your name , list the car on that policy and in case of the accident , your policy will become a secondary or excess . Once the limits of the primary car insurance are exhausted , your coverage would kick in and hopefully pay for the rest . I specifically used the word hopefully , because each accident is unique and it 's hard to interpret the coverage without the actual claim scenario . And even with a given claim scenario , sometimes there are 2 possible outcomes of a claim .
Perhaps this question is best answered by the statistical averages gathered over the years by LIMRA -LRB- Life Insurance and Market Research Association -RRB- : - Only about 7 % of agents that sign on with a single insurance company remain with that company past the first five years . - The percentage that remains in the business after departing from their first insurance carrier is around 20 % and each year that percentage declines . - About 3 % of all individual sales representatives that enter the insurance business remain in the business for 20 years or more . - The average age of a life insurance agent today is about 57 years old.It has been said that if you can sell life insurance , you can sell anything . As a career , being a life insurance agent can be very rewarding , but it is highly unlikely that life insurance will be the only line of insurance you sell unless you become highly specialized and work with other advising financial professionals as a team in the high-net worth market . Otherwise , you will find it necessary to sell other lines of insurance , notably health , DI , Annuities , LTCi , or property-casualty insurance -LRB- auto , home , liability , etc. -RRB- to pay the bills.Sometimes , insurance agents become securities-licensed and obtain various professional designations that allow them to practice financial advisory services and sales of stocks , bonds , and mutual funds . This is a fairly recent trend and usually results in the sale of life insurance being a rare occurrence due to all of the other responsibilities of being a financial advisor.Perhaps the most rewarding thing about being a life insurance agent -LRB- or being licensed to sell life insruance , among other things -RRB- is being the person that `` delivers the check '' to the survivors of someone that died prematurely and on whom there was a high level of financial dependence .
Anyone who meets their state 's requirements to hold a life insurance license and gets appointed with at least one life insurer can sell life insurance . The question becomes : Can one have a practice in accounting while selling life insurance ? In many states , the answer is yes . Some states do not permit accounting or legal professionals to be active while also selling life insurance . You can be a CPA , not be active in accounting and sell life insurance .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Pre Existing Condition Covered By The Health Insurance ?
Your pre-existing condition is not necessarily covered by you insurance plan . Although applicants can no longer be denied due to their medical history , many plans still have exclusions and limitations written into the policy . It 's vital to read through the summary of benefits and Coverage prior to enrolling in a policy to make sure it protects you and your conditions . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , feel free to call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
Under the affordable care act , a health insurance company can not deny you coverage for any pre-existing medical condition or other related illness . So , in short , you can apply for any health insurance plan during the annual enrollment period or outside of it if you have a qualifying event -LRB- e.g. getting married , having a baby , coming off of group coverage , etc. -RRB- for a special enrollment period . How a plan covers your course -LRB- s -RRB- of treatment and prescriptions will vary . You should consult with an experienced health insurance broker and review your existing coverage to determine if there is a more suitable program for your specific needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! One of the best things about the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- is that it banned health insurers from using the pre-existing condition exclusion any longer . It also removed the life time cap on payments that insurers had applied . While you can no longer be denied coverage , it is wise to shop your policy options , as not all policies will provide the same coverage and treatment plans . Once you have discussed with your care providers what to look for in your health plan , I recommend that next enrollment period you head to the healthcare.gov website , and shop for your policy there . Another great perk of the ACA is the subsidies that many people qualify for . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Any true major medical insurance policy , group or individual , should cover treatment for Lupus as it is an autoimmune disease in the same class as arthritis . Perhaps a person who was issued an individual health insurance policy that was grandfathered under the terms of the health care reform law was issued coverage excluding Lupus as a condition of issuing the coverage but that 's about the only context I can think of where this question could arise . Certainly in the era of health care reform , especially after January 1 , 2014 , coverage for conditions such as Lupus should not be a big point of discussion . No policy issued after that date can have pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . That being said , how treatment for conditions such as Lupus are handled from a level of coverage perspective can and do vary from one insurance carrier to the next . First of all , your perception of coverage may be affected by the type of policy you have enrolled in . If you enrolled in a policy with a $ 6000 deductible then your perception might be that your condition is n't being covered when actually it is but you are n't seeing any benefits until you 've met your deductible . In other cases your insurance carrier may have treatment protocols in place that guide your physician on the methods of treatment and types of medications that must be adhered to for treatment of such a condition and these may be a departure from your past experience and usage . If you are covered under a non-compliant health plan , possibly a limited benefit or indemnity type plan , then it is quite likely you would have little or no coverage for Lupus or be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions and/or waiting periods . Short Term Medical policies , which by nature do not cover pre-existing conditions , are also another possible area where a person could find that Lupus would not be covered . But , in today 's environment , a person suffering from Lupus can get major medical coverage that covers their condition .
As of January 1 , 2014 all major medical insurance plans , both individual and group , can no longer have any exclusions , limitations or waiting periods for pre-existing health conditions . So , from that perspective it is not a matter of which health insurance accepts pre-existing conditions . Any health insurance plan in compliance with the Affordable Care Act has to . Now , there are Short Term Major Medical policies and some limited benefit and/or indemnity type policies out there that can still apply underwriting and can limit or exclude pre-existing conditions but these are not major medical health insurance plans that meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . In some instances people are marketing these types of products as a low cost alternative to ACA compliant health insurance plans . They provide you with some degree of financial protection but they will not shield you from the Individual Mandate tax penalty or provide you with comprehensive coverage . If you are offered a policy that does not cover pre-existing conditions that is a red flag that someone is trying to sell you a non-compliant policy - BUYER BEWARE .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
Private health insurance covers pre-existing conditions ... most of the time ! I 'll explain : When applying for coverage during Open Enrollment -LRB- assuming it is a qualified Exchange or Off-Exchange plan -RRB- , pre-existing conditions are covered and there will be no waiting period or surcharge applied . As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , this issue is often discussed with customers and on our top-ranked websites . However , non-compliant plans , such as short-term policies , do not cover pre-existing conditions . If you miss Open Enrollment , these temporary plans are popular options .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
This will all change very soon as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 -LRB- PPACA aka Obamacare -RRB- takes effect , but for now this very much depends on if you allow your health insurance coverage to lapse . If you do not lapse coverage and begin private coverage , then usually a pre-existing condition would be covered . If you allowed coverage to lapse and then bought private insurance , it is possible for the insurer to excluse the pre-existing condition . Once PPACA takes effect , pre-existing conditions will no longer be allowed for the most part .
That depends entirely upon what the pre-existing condition is and it 's likelihood of causing a person to become disabled . Something like common allergies would technically be a pre-existing condition but just because you may need allergy shots it is highly unlikely that such a condition would be an issue . Now , if you 've had a mild stroke and have a family history of heart disease then you are in a situation where qualifying for disability insurance would be much more difficult , if not impossible , in the individual market . Some disability insurance carriers will issue coverage that might exclude coverage if the disability is a result of the pre-existing condition . And some employer groups offer group disability coverage to their employees that may be guaranteed to be issued as least up to certain levels of financial coverage .
Yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- individual and group major medical policies that are ObamaCare compliant can not have pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations on benefits , or waiting periods for the pre-existing condition to be covered . If someone is offering you a policy that does not comply with these requirements it may be a Short Term Medical policy or an indemnity/discount type plan . While these are legitimate insurance policies -LRB- as long as you are informed in advance of what they do and do not do -RRB- , as a rule they exclude pre-existing conditions and they do not meet the legal requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older you will be in your initial Medicare Open Enrollment Period to purchase a Medicare Supplement . You have six month from when your Part B takes effect to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately with no waiting period . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement anytime you want to outside of your initial Open Enrollment Period but once your Open Enrollment Period ends you will have to answer all health questions to qualify for a Medicare Supplement . If you have a serious health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium to get the pre-existing health condition covered .
Can you buy health insurance with a pre-existing condition ? In 2014 yes as it wo n't matter anymore . For now , you will have to refer to your state laws pertaining to pre - existing . In my state there are so many varialbles that automatically eliminate pre existing condition clauses that it is hard to give specific advice as it will depend on your state rules .
Pre-Existing Conditions are no longer an issue . The issue is now Open Enrollment . Let me explain . The Affordable Care Act made pre-existing conditions obsolete ; you can get health insurance no matter what condition you may have . However , you must buy health insurance during open enrollment , which ended April 15th . Now you ca n't get individual health insurance until January 1 , 2015 -LRB- open enrollment starts again November 15th -RRB- . There are certain exceptions that will allow you to get health insurance outside open enrollment such as the loss of employer coverage , marriage , divorce , etc. .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
At this moment in time a person can only have their health insurance coverage limited with regards to individual policies . Healthcare reform will require health insurance companies to disregard pre-existing conditions in the individual marketplace . When a individual is obtaining health insurance through their employer the group health plan will generally allow for pre-existing conditions . The gray area resides with businesses that are still offering `` grandfathered '' health plans -LRB- simply request details from your HR rep. -RRB- . There are several other factors that may impact your current health insurance options feel free to email me for further explination .
After January 1 , 2014 the answer to your question is `` Yes '' . Health insurance policies now must cover pre-existing conditions immediately and you can not be declined for coverage due to a pre-existing health condition . Under the preventive care requirements of the health care reform law , coverage for vaccination for HPV is a mandated benefit that is to be covered at no cost to the insured person .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Guaranteed health insurance means that you could not be declined for coverage due to any pre-existing medical conditions or other health-related issues . Under the Affordable Care Act , insurance companies can no longer decline you for medical reasons - meaning every health insurance policy is guaranteed issue for health-related reasons . You must still pay your premiums as your normally would . Prior to the ACA , insurance companies could medically underwrite you and charge you a higher rate , decline you , or have a pre-existing condition waiting period if you had a certain medical history .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Does One Get Medicare ?
The main way to qualify for Medicare is to be turning 65 year sold . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
It 's a personal decision . Many people get a Medigap Plan -LRB- aka Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- for peace of mind . Medicare Supplement insurance is designed to fill in the `` gaps '' that Medicare does n't cover . So , if you stick with just Original Medicare Part A & B , you leave yourself open to paying the 20 % that Medicare does n't cover . In addition , you are responsible for the Part A and Part B deductible . The Part A -LRB- Hospital insurance -RRB- deductible in 2014 is $ 1216 The Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- deductible in 2014 is $ 147 I spoke with a Medicare Beneficiary who wanted to add a Medicare Supplement because she had some health issues and the treatment was getting expensive . Unfortunately , she could not get approved for a policy because of her current medical conditions . The point is ... we do n't have a crystal ball to predict our health . If you 're healthy now and it does n't seem necessary to spend the money on a Medigap Plan , then think about the long term effects . As we age , our health changes and you may end up paying a lot more in medical bills . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best time to buy Medigap -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- right when you activate your Medicare Part B insurance . When you start Part B , it opens a 6-month initial open enrollment period to apply for any Medigap plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . If you do n't secure a Medigap plan during this period and later you decide you want one , you will be subject to medical underwriting unless you qualify for a guaranteed issue right . So why get one?Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are several factors to consider before making a decision for your senior Medicare needs : Foremost , will you be better off purchasing an insurance supplement , or is a Medicare Advantage plan better for you ? Those two solutions to solving your needs are different animals entirely , so make sure you educate yourself on the different advantages of each and look for only plans in your area . Some plans are county specific . Some supplements are area specific . This is one journey you do not want to take alone . So to help you make an informed decision with your agent , you of your power or attorney need to keep in mind the following items 1 . Are you eligible to change what you have ? 2 . What medications you take . 3 . How often do you go to the doctor ? 4 . How much risk are you willing to accept in return for lower premiums ? All insurance plans transfer some risk from the client to the insurance company . The less risk -LRB- deductibles and copay -RRB- on the client , the more premiums will be . Supplements that have the same letter name -LRB- PLan N , for example -RRB- theoretically cover the same items , so you should be shown what they do and do not cover , and be able to compare costs with other companies . 5 . Are you on assistance ? 6 . Are you under or over 65 ? When did you get part B ? 7 . What state and county do you live in ? 8 . Do you have extensive chronic illnesses ? 9 . Did you recently move , get married , get divorced , move in with family members ? 10 . What is the carriers financial rating and how long have they been in the Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage business ? These and other questions are ones I ask before making any recommendations to my clients . If you go to an independent broker who has many Medicare clients , he should have several choices to offer , as there are many companies that compete in this arena . It is n't an easy answer , hopefully the above questions will help you gather a checklist for your agent . If he or she does not ask many of these questions , or only has one solution , you might be better off to move on to a different agent
I do n't think is a matter of `` need '' for a medicare advantage plan , but a matter of choice . Would a Medicare Advantage plan be a better choice compared to a supplement or going with just basic medicare ? It is wise to compare these options and how they will effect you . As Ted has noted , there are some advantages to Medicare Advantage plans that make them very attractive as a choice to a consumer . So , it might be better to consider a simple basic difference between Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage , Medicare `` rights '' . When you purchase a Medicare Advantage you are assigning your Medicare rights to that organization and commit to service -LRB- outside of emergency -RRB- to that organization as they become your Medicare provider . A Medicare Supplement does not restrict the insured to any one location or provider . For some people , this is a very important issue and could be the deciding factor .
Medicare Part D , where do I apply ? What is the doughnut hole and how does it work ? How much does Medicare Part D cost ? Can I sign up for Part D at any time ? Which plan is the best one for me ? All good questions . The answer to where do you apply is this . You can apply through Medicare.gov You can sign up direct through a carrier Or you can find a good local insurance agent that specializes in Medicare plans
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
A Medigap policy plugs the gaps that Medicare A & B does n't cover . A person can get a Medigap plan part of what Medicare does not may or they can get a Medigap plan to cover all of what Medicare does not pay . The cost varies depending on which plan a person chooses .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will Health Insurance Pay For Dental Work ?
The short answer is generally no , that 's what Dental insurance is for . However , there are several caveats to this . First , the Affordable Care act does require pediatric dental coverage as part of the offer the health insurance plans have to make , so there is now some dental coverage for your children available in health insurance . Check with your current carrier to get the details . Secondly , there is a difference between , check up , filling a cavity , teeth clean etc. and an actual medical condition . For example , if your jaw was broken in a fall and it damaged some of your teeth in the process . Your health carrier may cover some or all of it because it is injury related and part of a larger issue . or is you have a cancer that destroys part of your jaw and teeth , again this is a medical issue and not just a dental one and your carrier may cover some of the medical expenses .
Original Medicare does not pay for dental work that is part of routine care of the teeth , such as exam , cleanings , fluoride treatments , or fillings . It also will not pay for dentures . Some Medicare Supplement plans will cover some dental work . Medicare will cover oral work that done to protect or treat the patient 's general health , or to prepare the patient for surgery , radiation , etc that will be performed for a health condition . It will also cover jaw surgery for a broken jaw , or follow up to an infection after an extraction . If the dental patient has a life threatening condition , Medicare may pay for the cost of hospitalization but not the dental work itself .
Health Insurance and Dental insurance are definately not the same . Dental insurance most certainly is an optional product that can be purchased stand alone alongside any other medical product . Dental insurance always has a specified `` waiting period '' before services can be performed and dental insurance either pays on a percentage of the total bill or it pays a flat dollar amount per service billed . All dental policies have a calendar year maximum that is payable . Some have deductibles , some do not . Health Insurance on the other hand always has a deductible and out of pocket , does not have a waiting period , and does not have an annual cap on benefits . Dental benefits or out of pockets do not have anything to do with health insurance out of pockets .
Health insurance does not cover dental implants unless there is an accident and severe damage to teeth . Dental insurance may cover implants , however , dental insurance is limited to a fixed dollar amount each year . For example the most common dental insurance pays a maximum of $ 1,500 in benefits a year and only 50 % of major work . If the dental policy covers inplants it may pay 50 % of one or two in a year .
Yes and No . ObamaCare compliant health insurance policies must cover PEDIATRIC dental and vision coverage . This means that dependent children age 18 and under will have some level of coverage for dental & vision care but there is no adult dental coverage in today 's health insurance coverage . In most cases , dental insurance is handled under a separate dental insurance policy even if an individual or group has their health and their dental insurance with the same insurance company .
In general disability insurance does not cover dental work . You are eligible to file a claim if a covered medical condition prevents you from performing the full time duties of your primary occupation . The policy replaces a portion of income , and makes claims payments directly to the insured . If you need dental work you cant submit a claim to disability insurance as you would with dental insurance . Disability insurance will not reimburse dentists for performing procedures . Disability insurance may cover your income loss if your dental problems interfered with your ability to work . This is very rare .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
No . Medigap plans do not cover dental care . Some carriers may offer what 's called `` Value Added Services '' which , in short , is offering discounts on dental work - please note , it 's NOT dental insurance . If you 're looking to buy dental insurance , you would need to purchase an individual dental insurance policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap policy and dental insurance coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , Medigap plan F does not cover dental , nor do any of the other Medigap plans . If you have a Medigap plan and want to have dental insurance , you would need to secure an individual dental insurance policy . Please note , when looking for dental insurance programs , please please please make sure you look at the details of the programs . Many times I see people buy dental discount plans thinking they are dental insurance plans - they are NOT ! Make sure what you 're buying is dental INSURANCE ! I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , root canals are covered under Dental Insurance Policies , and usually as a basic service . You would need to purchase a dental plan to cover that procedure . Most traditional dental plans cover it as a basic service , with an 80/20 coinsurance after the deductible . That 's where you pay the deductible first , then the plan pays 80 % of the bill , and you pay 20 % . But , before you just buy a dental plan , and go get the procedure , check to make sure what the waiting period for basic services is ... Many dental plans have a 6-12 month waiting period for those types of procedures .
A Medigap Plan F only covers a dental service if Medicare covers it . Routine dental care is not covered by Medicare . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately -RRB- - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . One of the ways carriers differentiate themselves is by offering `` value-added services '' . Value-added services regarding dental are simply discounts on dental services - not dental insurance . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . If you want coverage for routine dental services such as checkups , x-rays , fillings , etc. , you would need to add a separate dental insurance plan to provide coverage for routine services . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare does not cover `` dental '' . While `` Medicare Advantage '' covers some `` preventive care procedures it does not cover extensive dental procedures . There are `` dental '' policies available the coverage is usually limited to $ 1000 per year . In most cases dental maintenance is best planned to have preventive cleaning done each year plus any required `` dental filling ' each year but then if you need more extreme procedures you will probably spend a chunk of your vacation funds in the dental office
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
The short answer is generally no , that 's what Dental insurance is for . However , there are several caveats to this . First , the Affordable Care act does require pediatric dental coverage as part of the offer the health insurance plans have to make , so there is now some dental coverage for your children available in health insurance . Check with your current carrier to get the details . Secondly , there is a difference between , check up , filling a cavity , teeth clean etc. and an actual medical condition . For example , if your jaw was broken in a fall and it damaged some of your teeth in the process . Your health carrier may cover some or all of it because it is injury related and part of a larger issue . or is you have a cancer that destroys part of your jaw and teeth , again this is a medical issue and not just a dental one and your carrier may cover some of the medical expenses .
No . Routine dental services and procedures are not covered by Medicare . Medicare only pays for dental services that are conducted in a hospital - this is covered under Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- . You should purchase an individual dental insurance policy to secure benefits that cover dental care services / procedures .
Great question ! The answer , probably not so much . Hopefully you have a dental coverage included , if you have the policy through your employer as most of the expenses will be billed as dental , and not health . If you have dental , you should be ok . If you do n't , some portion of the cost can be covered by your health insurance , but I would expect that most wo n't be . If that is the case , ask your dentist and oral surgeon if you can set up payment plans with them , so that the work is affordable . If you would like more help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Unfortunately , Medigap does not cover routine dental examinations . Although Medigap Plans are designed to fill the gaps in Original Medicare , they will only pay for Medicare-covered services . Routine dental care is not covered under Original Medicare ; therefore , it is also not covered by Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- . Medicare will only pay for dental services that are an integral part of a Medicare covered procedure . Some exceptions include , reconstruction of the jaw following accidental injury , or extractions done in preparation for radiation treatment involving the jaw . Medicare Beneficiaries often purchase a separate dental plan to meet their individual needs . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , the answer is not much . In fact , to be brutally honest , not much of anything . Some emergency procedures may be covered , but generally there will be a need for a separate dental plan if you want to have any kind of dental work done . My suggestion is to go to the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- website , WEBSITELINK and look for a dental plan there . The policies found there can be purchased very cheaply , and it is very likely that you will qualify for help paying for it , if you purchase it through that exchange . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Yes dental insurance is not `` health '' insurance in the colloquial sense of the word health insurance -LRB- i.e. major medical insurance -RRB- . There is no requirement to have health insurance before having dental insurance . One can have health insurance and no dental insurance , just as they can have dental insurance and no health insurance . And , of course , one can also have both health insurance and dental insurance .
Original Medicare does not include routine dental care . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan , some plans will include basic dental care . If you want a dental plan , review plans carefully . Be aware that some plans are not insurance but only offer a discount if you use network providers . Insured dental plans vary widely in price and benefit .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Wisconsin Require Auto Insurance ?
Yes , Wisconsin does require auto insurance . The state minimums are fairly low though . I typically recommend no less than 100/300 coverage for any person that I speak to about coverage . The coverage is there to help protect your financial future . Things happen , do n't let an accident destroy yours ' or your family 's future . Call your local agent to find out how affordable coverage really is . Especially compared with the alternative .
In Wisconsin you are required to have auto insurance by law . There are several states that do require auto insurance . If you are caught driving in a state that does require auto insurance you will more than likely be fined and receive a ding on your MVR . Please contact a local agent to get more on the state laws in your area .
As of today according to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation website there is not a requirement to show proof of insurance when registering a vehicle . Please do remember that Wisconsin does require all drivers to have an active automobile insurance policy with state statute minimum requirements . D.O.T. requirements can change . I would recommend either confirming the requirements on the state 's D.O.T. website or calling the local D.O.T. office .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
In Wisconsin Rural Mutual Insurance Company which is a part of Farm Bureau Financial Services offers renters insurance . I can only speak for Wisconsin , but Farm Bureau Financial Services does operate in other states within the United States and handles personal lines with other companies in those states . If you are in Wisconsin give me a call and I can try to help you with coverage if you are not in Wisconsin , then I would suggest contacting your local Farm Bureau office to ask them for a local agent .
As of July 2013 the average car insurance policy in the United States cost $ 964 per year . In Wisconsin the average policy cost $ 770 . So yes , on average , auto insurance appears to b cheaper in Wisconsin . Keep in mind that these are averages and your individual circumstances may result in higher or lower rates in Wisconsin .
Like Tom , I can provide information for the state the I am licensed in which is Wisconsin . As of this point Wisconsin does not require proof of insurance when registering a vehicle of getting your license unless you have had incidents on your MVR then an SR-22 may be required . If you have had a lapse in coverage you will more than likely have to secure coverage with a carrier that accepts higher risk clients and pay a higher premium .
Auto insurance is mandatory in the state of Wisconsin under the financial responsibility act . This requires all drivers in the state of Wisconsin to care a minimum 25/50/10 coverages and uninsured motorist coverage of 25/50 . If you are pulled over by the police and are unable to provide proof of insurance you will more than likely be issued a ticket .
I can only speak for Wisconsin as that is the only state that I am currently licensed in . Wisconsin to the best of my knowledge as of this date requires liability coverage only for licensed drivers . This means bodily injury , property damage , uninsured motorist , and under-insured motorist . Medical payments currently is not a required coverage but clients must sign a document to opt out this coverage . All of these coverage must meet the states minimum coverage amount also . Contact a local agent to find out more about the coverage requirements within your state and the pricing associated with them .
As Mr. Harris indicates , car insurance is mandatory in all States . Mandatory auto insurance limits vary by State , however . The specific limits for your State can be found on your particular State 's Insurance Commissioner website or by simply searching the web for auto liability limits , with the name of your State . Limits vary from $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 / $ 10,000 in Florida -LRB- Yikes ! -RRB- to $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 55,000 in Wisconsin . The first two dollar amounts are for bodily injury from an accident and the third amount is for property damage to others , from that accident . For example : Using Wisconsin limits , In an insured driver 's liability situation , the policy would pay no more than $ 50,000 to any one injured person but no more than $ 100,000 , no matter how many people were injured . So , if three people were injured and two of them received $ 50,000 each , the third injured person would not be collecting from the policy , since the $ 100,000 limit would have been exhausted . As for the property damage to others , the policy would pay no more than $ 55,000 in total to one or more claimants . .
NML began as the entrepreneurial vision of `` General '' John C. Johnston , of Catskill , New York . He moved to Wisconsin in 1854 and started the Mutual Life Insurance Company of the State of Wisconsin in 1957 . Samuel Daggett was one of a group of businessmen who acquired the Mutual Life Insurance Company of the State of Wisconsin , moved it from Janesville to Milwaukee , and built it into Northwester Mutual Life Insurance Company in 1959 .
Each homeowners policy is different , but most do have some limited coverage for jewelry . Look over your policy or contact your agent to find out exactly what coverage is provided . I service auto , home , commercial , and farm lines in Wisconsin . Please feel free to contact me if you live in Wisconsin and would like to hear what my company has to offer .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
The answer is yes , unless your husband has coverage on a separate auto insurance policy . In Wisconsin at least every person in the household must be listed on an auto insurance policy or they must be listed on anouther auto insurance policy . Typically having more than one person listed on a policy will lessen the cost of coverage as opposed to having seperate policies . Contact your local agent to find out the premium difference between a combined policy and individual policies .
Yes , Wisconsin does require auto insurance . The state minimums are fairly low though . I typically recommend no less than 100/300 coverage for any person that I speak to about coverage . The coverage is there to help protect your financial future . Things happen , do n't let an accident destroy yours ' or your family 's future . Call your local agent to find out how affordable coverage really is . Especially compared with the alternative .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
This type of coverage is available with serveral companies that handle auto insurance . Dairyland Auto is a carrier that I use with my company when I have a client looking for this type of coverage in Wisconsin . I would suggest that you call your local agent and they should be able to help you directly or if not point you in the right direction .
To buy life insurance in Wisconsin , you can visit an agency that you find in the Yellow Pages , or you can shop from home on the internet . To see which websites offer life insurance in Wisconsin , put in your state in a free quote engine and see if it brings up a quote for you . Then you can contact them by phone or email if you like the quote or want to discuss your options .
To the best of my knowledgein Wisconsin all licensed drivers within the household must be listed on your policy unless they have their own policy . Each state has it 's own regulations about auto insurance coverage and regulations change from time to time . I would recommend that you contact your local agent to find out what the requirements are within your geographic area .
There are several ways to achieve this . You could keep a notebook with a list of all your personal items . You could keep the list electronicly in a format such as Word or Excel . There are also several home inventory softwares available out there for free or paid . The more detail you keep about the items that you own the quicker and truer the claims process will be . If you are in Wisconsin , I have a link on my business Facebook page to an inventory software that is free that was posted on insurance commissioners website for the state of Wisconsin . Feel free to like my page and check out the software .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Long Will My Life Insurance Last ?
If you are asking the question how long the proceeds will last to the survivors at your death , that answer is dependent on what you want the life insurance to pay for or fund at your death and the amount of money a surviving spouse or child will need each month after you have passed on . If you are asking the question regarding life insurance products , whole life is designed to last to age 99 . Term life insurance will expire at the end of the policy term if not renewed or converted . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
First let me ask you if you purchased temporary Term coverage , or permanent , Whole Life coverage ? If it is Term , then , so long as you continue to pay the premium , it will last for the period you contracted for , as level term , and then the rates will rise considerably . 97 % of folks let their Term policy lapse before that ever happens . I always recommend Whole Life , because it last a lifetime , if you pay the premiums , and those premiums NEVER increase , and also it builds up cash value which you can borrow against , or take out tax free to pay for college , retirement , or a new home . While more $ at first , eventually it actually becomes less expensive than term , as its built up value can pay the premiums for you . A quality company can provide you with a variety of choices . Call me , Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
It all depends on what type of insurance you purchased . Whole Life plans typically run for your entire life . Universal Life will run provided you have not taken so much of the cash value that the policy runs out should you stop making payments on it . Term Life will last for the length of the term you purchased . With all of these policies you need to make your monthly payments or the policy could lapse and you would lose your coverage .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
The two primary differences between long and short term disability are the policy elimination periods , and the policy benefit duration . The elimination periods describes how quickly benefit payments begin after the policyholder becomes disabled . Short term policies have much shorter elimination periods . The benefit duration describes how long payments will continue while the policyholder is continuously disabled . Short term policies may have a benefit duration lasting up to 24 months , while long term policies may have a benefit duration lasting to age 65 .
There are several difference between Whole Life and Term Life Insurance . Put very simply , here are some : 1 -RRB- Term life insurance lasts for a `` term '' ; Whole life lasts for one 's `` whole life '' . These both depend on payments to last that long . 2 -RRB- Term life insurance does not have cash value ; Whole life insurance has cash value . Again , how the policy and payments are set up will determine the amount of cash value . 3 -RRB- Term life insurance only protects against death ; Whole life has options to use the policy while alive . There are some Term policies that now offer `` living options '' , as well ; however , Whole Life offers even more options than those .
There is n't a correct answer to this question , only the answer each individual comes to in regard to their wants and needs . The catch to the decision of when or how much to buy is the longer you wait the more expensive it becomes to purchase . Something to consider that rarely is considered is the purchase of Whole Life insurance is control . A whole life is the one policy where the price is set at the begining and stays that way through the life of the policy . With term the insured does not really control cost the insurance carrier does through the life of the policy . An insurance company can not change or alter a whole life policy without your permission . Since you can combine policies and types of coverage -LRB- it is never all or nothing -RRB- how much whole life is entirely up to you . The split is up to the individual . Some people carry combinations of policies with the idea that they will shed the term as time goes by , ending up with the whole life at the end of a long happy life . Last thought on this subject . An insurance company has less power over the insured with whole life . They have to `` ask '' you and you have to agree to any changes . Where this can be reassuring is if your health changes down the road . I have several serious health conditions and it is good to know my life insurance company can not raise my price or change anything without my say so .
You life insurance proceeds will last according to the type of policy you got . If a Term policy , the policy will specify a certain number of years , such as 10 or 20 . When the end of the term comes up , the policy will end or jump up in price to an incredibly high price . If death occurs during the term , the policy proceeds will be paid . If death does not occur during the term , no proceeds are paid . If Whole Life that you have not borrowed against and have made payments according to schedule , the policy will pay out when you die or when it matures -LRB- usually at age 100 -RRB- , whatever comes first . If Universal Life , the proceeds will last for as long as the policy was set up to last , and according to how it is performing . UL usually has a guaranteed no lapse period of a set number of years , as long as premiums are made . If the interest rate goes up , it can last longer .
How long Life Insurance will last depends on the Type of life insurance . Term insurance is designed to last for the length of the Term , -LRB- 1 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 30 years -RRB- , or until the insured dies - whichever comes first . This of course depends on the owner making the premium payments as agreed . If premiums are not paid the policy will lapse and the insurance ends . With Whole Life insurance , -LRB- assuming the premiums are kept current -RRB- , the insurance lasts for the life of the insured up to the age specified in the contract - typically 100 years . When the insured reaches that age the insurance provider will pay the owner the entire value of the policy and the contract ends . SHould the insured die before reaching the `` maturity age '' of the contract , the beneficiary will receive the benefit value of the policy - income tax Free .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
That is a great question ! Both whole life and universal life insurance policies are cash value building life long policies . Whole life is simple , you pay a set premium every month , and the policy lasts as long as you do , as long as you keep making payments . The death benefit is specifically stated . A universal life policy is not quite so simple . These policies are often marketed with promises of great value growth , and perhaps not so clearly explaining the risks or the things that have to happen to get that great gain . These policies are typically only guaranteed to last 20 years . The payments are given to you in a range , and can vary even from that range . The amounts paid in , the performance of the invested funds , and the cost of the insurance will dictate how long the policy stays in effect , and whether there is growth . I guess a good way to describe it to you is that if you were looking for a policy that you could buy , make payments on and forget about , buy a whole life policy . If you want a policy that could have great gains , that you can watch the performance of , and change the payments of , then buy a UL policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
There are a variety of factors that impact how long 401 -LRB- k -RRB- savings will last , including : account balance , retirement age , living expenses , withdrawal rate , tax rates , charges and fees . Several investigative reports by the Employee Benefit Research Institute , 60 Minutes , Frontline , Forbes and other organizations show that most accounts run out of funds within 7-8 years , due to fees and taxes . And , if tax rates increase in the future as expected , the savings may be depleted much faster . To watch the video reports or for a detailed analysis to predict how long your savings will last go to WEBSITELINK iflretirement.com/usa-insurance-brokers
That is a great question ! Deferred Annuities have two stages to them - an accumulation phase , where the contract accumulates growth , and an annuitization stage , where it begins to pay out , or `` annuitize '' . Your contract should specify how long your accumulation phase lasts , and for how long your payments will last . Eachannuity can vary in what your options are to start your payment streams , so contact your agent and have them review what your contract allows . Generally if you do nothing , they begin to pay out automatically when you hit a specified age . Contact your agent , to be certain that you can begin your payments without any issues , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There are many past universal life policy holders who consider it to be bad because they have been burned by universal life . Most often , this occurred because the projected interest rate for the policy was unrealistically high . This caused their policies to lapse much sooner than expected . Since then , some universal life policies now offer a guaranteed minimum interest rate and maximum COI -LRB- cost of insurance -RRB- . However long your policy is shown to last with those variables is how long your policy is guaranteed to not lapse . In my opinion , universal life insurance is not bad as long as consumers understand the guarantees , or lack thereof .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
Guaranteed premium life insurance is a life insurance policy in which you get a contractual guarantee that the premium will not change . It will not increase , and it will not decrease . That is a very good deal . You do not want to have to worry about your premium changing . This product is , after all , supposed to be the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it should be dependable . Virtually all life insurance products available now provide premium guarantees . Its really just a question of how long the guarantee will last . Term insurance gives you guarantees for a specified amount of time . Could be 10 years , 15 , 20 , 30 , etc. . After that , watch out . The price could go skyhigh . Universal life could also give you guarantees for a specified amount of time . The interesting thing about this product is that since it has a flexible premium , you can determine how long you want that guarantee . It could last from a few years , to your lifetime . You can kind of make it function as permanent term insurance . No guaranteed cash accumulation , but a lifetime guarantee on the premium . And on the death benefit , by the way . Whole life typically comes with a lifetime guarantee on the premium . Thats the way the product is designed . I think you can appreciate that the longer you want the guarantee , the higher will be the premium . You get what you pay for . There you go . What else do you need to know ?
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Do Georgia Employers Have To Offer Health Insurance ?
Unlike omst parts of the Affordable Care Act , if you are employed by a business with less than 50 full time employees , your employer has the option of offering coverage , but not is not mandated to do so . The health law does not require businesses with fewer than 50 employees to offer health insurance to their workers . Small Employers wanting to offer coverage to employees may do so using the SHOP exchange , which is meant to help small business owners find affordable coverage . The government offers certainincentives in the form oftax credits and deductions to encourage employers with fewer than 25 employees who set up coverage through SHOP and help pay for it . Currently in Georgia , the only way to sign up for a SHOP plan is to go see an agent , broker or insurance company and fill out the paperwork . Online enrollment is scheduled to be available during next fall 's open enrollment period , starting November 15 , 2014 .
Health Insurance rates in Georgia are going up . Each family 's cost is going to be different . Your best resource is a local broker that represents multiple companies including major medical companies . The rates in Georgia are different in the Atlanta metro area versus other parts of Georgia . You will need to look at the networks in your area and determine if your doctors are in the network being offered by the insurance company . Health Reform has brought challenges to the price of family coverage . There are new options in the Georgia market to help handle the rising premiums . You might consider clinic programs , tele-medicine , high deductible plans , or many other solutions that lower costs and improve Out of Pocket expenses . The Health Insurance world is changing and you will need help . Do a web search for your area and health insurance and do a review of your current situation to determine if you can do better .
Unlike omst parts of the Affordable Care Act , if you are employed by a business with less than 50 full time employees , your employer has the option of offering coverage , but not is not mandated to do so . The health law does not require businesses with fewer than 50 employees to offer health insurance to their workers . Small Employers wanting to offer coverage to employees may do so using the SHOP exchange , which is meant to help small business owners find affordable coverage . The government offers certainincentives in the form oftax credits and deductions to encourage employers with fewer than 25 employees who set up coverage through SHOP and help pay for it . Currently in Georgia , the only way to sign up for a SHOP plan is to go see an agent , broker or insurance company and fill out the paperwork . Online enrollment is scheduled to be available during next fall 's open enrollment period , starting November 15 , 2014 .
Health insurance is regulated by each state . Before you can buy a policy in Georgia -LRB- as an example -RRB- a carrier must file their policy form and rates with the state Dept. of Insurance and wait on approval . This is a long and costly process . About a year ago GA passed a law that allowed carriers to market products from other states in Georgia . So far not a single carrier has filed for approval to sell in Georgia . Despite what some people believe , even if you were able to buy coverage from another state the savings would be nominal , if anything at all .
As a small business -LRB- under 50 FTE lives -RRB- , PPACA will eventually offer you an ability to send your employees to the exchange where they can select from several carriers . The Federal Exchange in Georgia -LRB- check your state to determine whether they have an exchange or are using the federal exchange -RRB- will not be ready to offer multiple choices -LRB- PPACA SHOP Plan -RRB- until 2015 . We believe , at this time , the employer may select a single carrier and plan to offer if they so chose . Talk with a licensed agent about your state 's program as state exchanges may allow multiple choices .
There are many websites that offer you the chance to see free life insurance quotes by inputting your information . That is a good place to find life insurance in Georgia . Be sure that the website uses privacy measures and has good reviews . Getting referrals or looking at blogs is another way to find a good life insurance agency in Georgia , as is reading answers from a website like this one .
Some Blue Cross plans will write life insurance , usually through a sister company . In South Carolina life insurance policies are issued through Companion Life Insurance Company . In Georgia , life insurance policies are written by Greater Georgia Life Insurance Company , Some Blue Cross companies are stock carriers , others are mutual , and a few are not-for-profit companies .
If life insurance proceeds in Georgia are left to a person as beneficiary , creditors can not take the money away from the beneficiary to pay the debts of the insured , -LRB- unless the beneficiary was co-signer to that debt -RRB- . If the life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , then creditors in Georgia can access those benefits to pay off the debt owed them by the deceased .
Humana offers Medicare supplement plans and Medicare Advantage in some states . Their Medicare supplement plan offerings are limited in most areas . In Georgia for example , Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , F , K , N and High F . Some of their plans are competitive but there are almost always lower priced plans from other carriers .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
Essentially there are two ways to buy a Medigap plan in Georgia . You can buy direct from a carrier or through an agent . When you buy direct from the carrier you get the same plan at the same rate as buying from an agent . Carriers have in house representatives that can only tell you about their plan . They do n't know about competitor plans and are prohibited from discussing a competitor plans . Once you purchase a plan from a carrier any follow up questions are handled by a CSR rep. When you call you can expect to have an automated service answer your call , following the obligatory `` Press 1 for English '' you will be told to `` Please listen carefully as our options have changed '' . From there you will be routed most often to voice mail . Your call will be returned on their schedule , not yours . You will never talk to the same person twice . Or you can buy from an agent that lives in Georgia and is familiar with plans in your area . Some agents will insist on coming to your home , while others will allow you to purchase over the phone using email and your mailbox . Some agents will only represent one carrier . If you go that route you might as well buy direct . Most agents will represent several carriers and help you understand the pro 's and con 's of each carrier . They will be familiar with rate history and can tell you which ones have a better track record of customer service . There are about 15 or so carriers in GA that offer Medigap . Some only sell direct or through their own representatives . Others use independent brokers that represent several carriers . Maybe a third of carriers make their rates available online but most will only disclose rates if you talk to them direct or through an agent . Hint : Some of the most competitive rates are not found online ... Most of the plans use issue age rating but a few , including the top two carriers -LRB- ranked by sales -RRB- use attained age brackets . You need to understand the difference in pricing structure and rate history if you want to avoid sticker shock on renewal . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
Several carriers write major medical insurance in Georgia , including Aetna , Blue Cross , Humana , Cigna , Kaiser and United . Each carrier has their strong points and weaknesses . Some offer plans that do not cover brand Rx or will only cover generics and a few brand name drugs . Currently -LRB- 2013 -RRB- there are no plans that include maternity benefits , and no carriers that offer child only coverage . I suggest you talk to a local agent that is familiar with several carriers and can explain the benefit of each .
The best place to get a Medigap plan in Georgia is through an Agent that is Independent and working for you . A great benefit of a Medigap plan is that the level of coverage is standardized by the government . Every Insurance Company is offering the same level of coverage using letters A through N . The major difference being the price of the plan as each company offer a different price for the same amount of coverage . A good Independent Agent will have many companies to look at and be able to discuss the best price offer . This best price is not always based on the current rates for your age . They need to be able to discuss the company 's pricing history at ages down the road . You do not want a company that lures you in with a low initial premium and then historically raises it as you get older . You should consider the Customer Service of the Insurance Company and look for a responsive company that answers your questions and can work with your agent . Your agent should be able to help over the phone or be there in person if needed .
Humana offers two kinds of Medicare coverage . In some areas you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan . Advantage plans vary by zip code and may not be available in your home town area . Most people will want to consider traditional Medicare and a Medigap plan . Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , B , C , F , K , L , N and Hi F in Georgia . Compare rates before you buy .
The cheapest car insurance rates in Georgia can be easily found with the help of an experienced broker . That 's what we do best ! -LRB- Along with our top-rated websites -RRB- Among the factors that determine prices are your age , the type of car you own , your coverage and your driving record . Although carriers such as State Farm , Farmers , Liberty Mutual , Esurance , Progesssive and Geico are typically quite competitive , it 's important to shop the right way . Among the cities with the lowest rates , usually , Valdosta , Athens , Brunswick , Cummings and Clayton offer the best pricing . However , specific ages and different types of cars will make a difference in all situations .
The best way to find the cheapest health insurance in Georgia is to work with an independent agent . That health insurance agent does n't work for just one carrier so they will be able to show you plans from all the major carriers . A lot of agents will also have a website -LRB- like ours -RRB- where you can compare quotes instantly online .
Medigap plan C covers essentially everything included in Medigap plan F. Plan C covers your Medicare Part A and Part B deductibles and coinsurance , benefits for SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- and foreign travel . Plan C does not cover Medicare excess charges . Very few carriers offer plan C and I have not found it to be competitive in Georgia .
The cost of health insurance for a family can vary depending on the plan you choose , the state you live in various other factors such as age and smoking status . The quickest way to find out what health insurance costs for a family would be to go to a website for an independent agent that will let you run a quote or you can call us . Our website allows people to be review plans from all the major carriers in under 60 seconds . Click `` other '' on our website to go the the page to run a quote for a family . You can also give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 . We have helped many clients in Texas , Florida , Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina , Michigan and Colorado find a great health insurance plan for their family .
AARP has endorsed United Healthcare as their carrier of choice for Medicare supplement plans . The plan selection is a bit limited compared to other carriers . In Georgia for example they only offer Medicare supplement plans A , B. C. F , K , L and N . There are almost always plans with other carriers with lower rates .
Humana offers Medicare supplement plans in most states on a statewide basis . In some states Humana also has a Medicare Advantage plan that may or may not be available in your zip code or county . In Georgia the Humana Medicare supplement plan is neither the highest priced plan nor the most competitive .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Type Of Auto Insurance Provides Coverage From A Tree ?
If a Tree falls on your auto and causes damage this would fall under your comprehensive coverage . A claim would be paid for your loss minus your deductible up to the value of your vehicle if it were a total loss . If you hit a tree this would fall under your collision coverage . Your loss would be paid up to the value of the vehicle if a total loss minus your deductible .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
I am going to go out on a limb here -LRB- sorry about that -RRB- and guess you mean a CAR crushed by a falling tree . IF the auto insurance policy has `` comprehensive '' coverage the damage will be covered by the auto policy . IF the property owner on which the tree stands was negligent in maintaining the tree , i.e. the tree was dead and likely to come down at any time , coverage may be provided under the liability portion of the property insurance policy . However a healthy , maintained tree brought down in a windstorm is not the result of negligence on the part of the property owner .
There are two major sections to a homeowners policy , the property coverages and the liability coverages . Damage to your property caused by a fallen tree is covered by the property coverages and is adjusted after payment of the deductible . If your tree falls on a neighbors house and does damage your liability policy will provide coverage . In this case the claim will be adjusted without payment of any deductible . The one part that hasnt been mentioned is the tree itself . In most cases the coverage for the tree is quite limited . As you can understand replacing a mature tree can be very expensive . It is , however possible , that your homeowners policy has some coverage extension that will pay for the loss of a tree caused by a windstorm or similar event . Again that claim will be adjusted after payment of a deductible but the deductible isnt applied per tree , rather the entire claim .
It 's the homeowner 's responsibility to remove dead or damaged trees before they fall . Homeowners insurance will not cover dead or damaged trees . Homeowners insurance will cover resulting damage and the cost to cut up the tree if the trees falls on covered property . If a tree falls over but does not hit covered property , there is no coverage . If your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , your neighbor is only responsible for the portion of the tree located on his property . The portion of the tree on your property is your responsibility even though it 's not your tree .
Damage to your own or neighbors home resulting from a fallen tree most likely will be covered by homeowners -LRB- HO -RRB- policy . If this is your tree that has damaged your neighbors house or property , your should have personal liability coverage within your HO policy . Claims coming from fallen trees that as a result of fire , wind , lighting , hail are usually covered by an HO policy . The landscaping itself may be covered under Coverage C on your HO policy or under Tenants Betterments and Improvements coverage on your Business Personal Property coverage . There are certain exclusion to each insurance policy . Bad soil , over watering or insects are usually excluded from coverage . You can talk to your agent or call your company 's claims department and ask them specific questions about the fallen trees coverage .
It depends . Where does it fall?What caused it to fall ? A tree struck by lightning is typically covered . A tree that falls due to wind is not covered unless itlands onyour property such as your home or auto . If it lands in your yard and causes no damage , there is no coverage for the tree itself . Your healthy tree that lands on your neighbor 's house is covered by their homeowners insurance not yours . Prior to making a claim , you should always talk to your trusted insurance advisor to verify your coverage .
While in most cases it will not cover the tree itself it will cover the damage caused by a downed tree and if necessary removal of the tree from the damaged structure . If a tree falls on your house , the damage will be covered and the tree removed . The tree itself will not be replaced .
Homeowners Insurance will not pay for dead tree removal . A tree is a plant and it is the homeowners obligation to show pride of ownership and to take care of his or her yard . Big plant or small it 's the homeowners responsibility to maintain . Also a dead tree just sitting there and has not caused any damage to the dwelling , therefore there is no claim . I know what your thinking . The tree is a potential hazard and could fall on the house and cause damage or hurt someone . If this were to happen and you were unaware of any potential hazard there would be coverage should the tree fall on your house . However , if you are aware the tree is a hazard and fail to mitigate the hazard you are negligent and are not living up to your obligation as a homeowners and risk having the claim denied .
If a fallen tree , whether your own or your neighbors , has landed in your yard , on car or on your home , you are likely wondering whether your current homeowners insurance policy will cover the repair costs . Damage to your home and its contents , regardless of whether the trees origin was from your own property or a neighboring , is covered under a homeowners policy . For property such as sheds , additions or detached garages , there is generally a maximum amount of coverage offered for fallen tree damage -LRB- i.e. 10 % of your entire propertys value -RRB- . Even though your homeowners insurance policy will cover damage resulting from fallen trees , it is important to keep in mind that you are financially responsible for any applicable policy deductible . For example , if your homeowners insurance policy has a $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 deductible and the total cost of repairs is $ 25,000 , you will be required to pay either $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 out of pocket for the clean-up to be completed . If the fallen tree was from your neighbors yard , it is possible that your insurance company will attempt to get their policy to cover the cost of the damage . In this event , you may be refunded any deductible you paid for the repairs .
Because tree root damage is a process that happens over a period of time tree root damage would not be a covered loss . Covered losses would fall under sudden and accidental . Tree root damage is neither sudden nor accidental . In fact the damage is actually preventable if the tree is properly maintained or removed if necessary . Keep in mind , a tree is just a plant and your plants needs to be kept up . As beautiful as they are sometimes you have to take the ax to the tree .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
If you are asking if homeowners insurance covers a tree falling on your home . The answer is more than likely yes if the tree falling was caused by a covered peril . Bear in mind that their are exclusion within every policy . If you are asking about damage to the tree itself . Once again if the tree falling is because of a covered peril there may be some coverage for the tree itself . As always read over your policy completely or give your local agent a call and discuss your questions or concern to ensure that you understand your coverages .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
Most insurance policies will require a tree hit something like a house , fence , or another structure for the removal of the tree to be covered . If the tree simply falls down in the yard it will not be covered for removal by most insurance policies . Some policies provide coverage for the value of the tree . You should read your policy or call your local independent insurance agent to find out exactly hose your policy reads . Hope this answer helps .
Homeowners insurance does not cover tree roots . There is nocoveragefor removal and no coverage for damage caused by tree roots . Damage to your dwelling must be sudden and accidental . Tree roots cause problems over a long period of time and in most cases the problem is evident way before it becomes a big issue . A tree is nothing more then a plant that should be maintained by the homeowner . I suggest discussion the specific details of the tree root problem with your local agent .
If the demise of the tree was naturally occuring then homeowners insurance will not cover the removal . That would be considered a maintenance issue and homeowners insurance does n't cover maintenance . However if the tree came down on and damaged the home , some coverage would be provided under the debris removal clause of the policy . Lightning damage to trees is also covered by most comprehensive policies , though a low $ $ limit of coverage is provided . Check with your local insurance professional .
We have had a large number of ` fallen tree ' claims following wind strorms . In each and every case , the insurance carrier will send out a claims adjustor to assess the damage and try to assess the health of the tree . The only coverage that exists on a homeowners insurance policy or a landlords insurance policy would be in the Liability section . The liability section will afford coverage as a result of the negligence of the covered party for damage to others . If the tree was healthy and the cause was Wind , an ` Act of God ' is not negligence on the part of the insured , thus the claim would be denied . If , however , the tree was in bad health -LRB- perhaps rotten in part -RRB- and the tree fell and caused damage to another party , this situation would be deemed negligence on the part of the insured and the claim would be covered . Although we are a home insurance processor and not claims adjustors , this scenario has played out multiple times and we feel confident that it is generally a good rule of thumb .
This is really more of a legal question than an insurance question but I 'll give you some guidelines . As a general rule , if it 's on your property , it 's your responsibility . So , legally , if it 's your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , he should take care of it . This does n't always happen , and many small battles have ensued over just this type of thing . I 've seen neighbors do some pretty weird things in these situations . I 've seen people send registered letters , call the police , report to the city or township , even hire a lawyer to sue . My advice , be reasonable and talk to your neighbor , preferably before it falls , and come to some aggreement about what needs to be done , if anything . From an insurance standpoint , nothing 's really going to be done with a fallen tree unless it falls on something an causes damage . Then , in most cases , your insurance company will pay to move it off of your home , that 's it . Some homeowners policies will have endorsements available for debris removal which may pay to remove it , usually up to some limit . Many times , though , removing it from a structure is all an insurance company will do and removing the tree from your property is your responsibility .
Great question ! If the tree fell due to negligence -LRB- it was dead , or had significant rot and was a hazard that was n't fixed -RRB- then whomever 's property it sat on may be liable for the damage to your car . If it was your tree , then your comprehensive coverage clause in your auto insurance policy should cover it . If it was a healthy tree that was felled by `` an act of God '' , you may have a rougher time collecting . If you have more questions , feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help ! Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
Which Life Insurance Is Best ?
There is no one best life insurance company , and no one best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are rated by rating agencies -LRB- AM Best , Standard and Poore 's , Moody 's and Fitch are the most popular -RRB- . You can look at their ratings with each agency to see how life insurance companies compare with each other . Regarding types of life insurance policies , sometimes Whole Life is best , sometimes Universal Life best suits a particular need , sometimes Term Life works best . To find the best company and policy for you and your particular need , you can visit with a reputable agent and ask them to find you the best qualify product that is suitable for your needs .
Video Transcript : Which life insurance is best ? Sometimes , you have to look at the ratings of the carrier , because people are very concerned about the financial strength of a carrier , so I want to look at the financial strength . The second is : How do they price out on product spreadsheets or grids ? Is the premium competitive with other players ? The third thing I want to know about is : What are their claims-paying ability ? Are they paying their claims on time ? There are certain services that actually look at that issue . You can check out financial strength , you can look at claims-paying ability , and most importantly , is that premium going to be really the most competitive premium that you can get ? That 's why we like to shop in the brokerage community to see which one is the best . Lastly , it 's an underwriting issue as well . Which one is the best ? Who gives me the most benevolent underwriting and the cheapest offer , based on my medical condition ?
The type of life insurance that is best for you depends on what you need it for , your budget , and how much you need . If you need a lot of coverage and have very little to spend , getting Term insurance will most likely be your best option . If you have a lifelong need and can afford to pay the premiums for Whole or Universal Life , those will be your better option . Visiting with an experienced agent who you can trust can save you hundreds of dollars while still getting you the right coverage to meet your needs .
That is an excellent question , and one I get a lot ! Here 's the best way I can answer you . It depends upon what you want it to do , your budget , and your age . If you are looking to provide for your funeral expenses , and leave some money behind , knowing for sure that the policy will do that for you , then a whole life policy is best , especially if you are young , and can purchase relatively large amounts cheaply . If you are looking for temporary coverage , to cover a debt , or because at this time your budget is really tight , then maybe a term policy is right for you . A combination of both may be right for you . It really depends upon your specifics . If you 'd like to discuss them , drop me an email , and I 'd happily give you some better information , okay ? Thanks for asking !
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
There is no one best life insurance company , and no one best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are rated by rating agencies -LRB- AM Best , Standard and Poore 's , Moody 's and Fitch are the most popular -RRB- . You can look at their ratings with each agency to see how life insurance companies compare with each other . Regarding types of life insurance policies , sometimes Whole Life is best , sometimes Universal Life best suits a particular need , sometimes Term Life works best . To find the best company and policy for you and your particular need , you can visit with a reputable agent and ask them to find you the best qualify product that is suitable for your needs .
The best life insurance to purchase is that which you can afford and which best meets your particular needs . If the premium is so high that you can not afford to pay it when the first car repair comes along , then that is not the best policy for you . If you are a healthy 70 year old buying 10 year Term life insurance to pay for your funeral , that is not the best policy for you . Visiting with a professional life insurance representative will help you find the best life insurance to purchase . Unfortunately , there is no other good answer , but the good news is that if you do n't like talking to insurance agents , you can do it by phone or email .
Of the different types of life insurance term life , whole life , universal life and variable life , term life is actually the least expensive value per premium dollar . The shorter the term , the less expensive term life insurance will become . The common types of time periods of term life insurance range from annual renewable which goes up every year to 5-10-15-20-25-30-35 year terms which increase premiums according to the length of time of a guaranteed level premium . Please keep in mind your premiums have more to do with your personal factors than anything else which is based on your personal risk . Underwriters will consider your age , build , current health , life style , health history , occupation , residence , income and assets when determining your exact premium . I recommend using an independent experienced life insurance broker to help you find the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There are many companies that will say they sell the best life insurance . But , aside from looking at ratings from agencies like AM Best and Moody 's , there is technically no best life insurance company , and no best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are highly regulated , and different policies meet different needs . So the agent who sells the best life insurance is the one that finds the best policy for YOU .
Asking a life insurance agent how much life insurance costs is like asking a realtor how much a house costs . Which house ? Which life insurance plan ? There are entirely too many variables to answer that question . First is what is the need for life insurance and is there an insurable interest ? In other words , does someone lose financially or become saddled with your debt at your death ? Next are the underwriting questions to determine an accurate quote . We need your sex , age , build , health status , health history , life style , occupation , net worth , residence , and length of term or type of plan . It can vary over 14 rating classes as to which premium class you qualify for . I suggest using an experienced independent life insurance broker to shop the market to find the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
There are a number of different types of life insurance policies because there are different types of coverage needed to best suit different types of needs . Permanent life insurance with a cash value is best if you want to borrow from your own money to pay for needs like college or weddings . Term life insurance if best for temporary needs like paying off a mortgage . Universal or Whole Life is best for paying permanent needs life funeral costs . You really ca n't call one type of life insurance best . They are all best if purchased for the right need .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
It depends on the insurer as to what Adjustable Life is . There were a couple of midwestern companies who had products with that moniker which were fixed premium adjustable life insurance products . Universal Life one of the dominant forms of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life which is the official name of the product . So , it may be that you are asking about Universal Life . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
United of Omaha is one of the biggest carriers in the life insurance industry and is an A + rated carrier by A.M. Best . Their life insurance rates can be competitive with many options . Often , some carriers have much better rates for certain types of coverage than other types -LRB- e.g. a carrier may be more competitive in the term insurance market than they are in the permanent insurance market , and vice versa -RRB- . Please note , when comparing life insurance companies , there are a number of factors you need to consider in addition to the financial rating of a life insurance company . Just because they may be a big name company , does not mean they 're going to be the best carrier for your needs . The most important factor you need to consider when looking at life insurance is the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification determines the premiums for the program . It 's important to shop the case BEFORE applying for any coverage so you know which carrier will work best for your specific medical history , which will in turn point you in the best starting position . You ideally want to only have to go through the underwriting process once , not multiple times . If you try to apply to multiple carriers at the same time , it often works against you as it acts like a red flag to carriers and more questions get asked . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can help you determine what coverage structure is most suitable to your needs and budget , review and compare multiple options for you to make sure you 're getting the lowest rates for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Hello , In order to buy Life Insurance in New York State you must consult with an honest agent and fair agent that explains to you about the policy and how you benefit from the policy . There are different forms of Life Insurance which are Whole Life , Universal Life and Term Life . There are also some other types of Life insurance depending on your needs . The best way to buy is from a secure company with a high financial rating . Also look for lowest rates and other riders that can be added in order with alow rates . Other products from Life Insurance Companies will be Critical Illness Insurance which is Cancer , Stroke , Accident , andHeart Attack . It is always best to arrange an appointment with an agent in order to get more information on products and benefits and how they can benefit you and your family . Independent Agents as myself are known to offer a wider range of products and services and lower rates because we deal with a larger base of carriers , therefore , giving you the benefit of choosing the best product for you at the best , and lowest rates . As an Independent Agent , Iworkwith the bestcarriers with strong financial ratings and with a complete heritage that goes way back .
There are two basic types of life insurance : term and permanent . Term is for temporary needs and covers a specific length of time - typically up to 30 years . Permanent or cash value life insurance is designed to last for a lifetime and , provided the required premiums are paid , can not be outlived . Permanent policies comes in different forms such as whole life or universal life . Whole life features fixed premiums that must be paid until maturity , often age 100 . Universal Life is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life - this is the official name of this type of product . It describes in a simple way how the product works . Premiums are flexible because that can be adjusted upward or downward . You can also skip premiums . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly.Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policyowners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Permanent policies have variations with features and flexibility for a wide range of planning situations . Consult with a life insurance professional to design the best plan to meet your specific needs .
If you are asking the number one life insurance company in the world by size would be China Life Insurance Co. with assets over $ 81 billion . If you are asking the number one life insurance company in the United States would be MetLife with assets over $ 62 billion . If you are asking the number one life insurance company in other categories , look them up under the independent ratings companies that rate insurers in a number of categories . The main ratings companies are AM Best , Standards & Poor 's , Fitch and Moody 's which rates insurers are their financial stability and performance . The best way to find the best life insurance company for your needs is to ask your family , friends and coworkers , who they have and are they satisfied . The same is true finding an independent life insurance broker to help you find the best company , product and price to cover your unique situation .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is A Blue Medicare Card ?
In Australia , a blue Medicare card is an interim card issued to individuals or families eligible for Medicare in that country . Some people in the United States may call a Medicare Supplement card from Blue Cross Blue Shield a blue Medicare card . However , Medicare cards in the US are red white and blue .
In Australia , a blue Medicare card is an interim card issued to individuals or families eligible for Medicare in that country . Some people in the United States may call a Medicare Supplement card from Blue Cross Blue Shield a blue Medicare card . However , Medicare cards in the US are red white and blue .
In Australia , the Medicare card is a green color -LRB- or light blue for interim cards -RRB- . It is issued to individuals or families who are eligible to receive a rebate of medical expenses under the Australian Medicare system when they are treated privately by a doctor with a provider number . In the United States , Medicare cards are red , white and blue .
This is a good question . You can use your Medicare card when it is effective , If you look at your red , white and blue card it will show Part A and Part B effective dates on the card . You can use your card at the doctors office , hospital , etc. if you are on original Medicare , that is , you only have Medicare part A and part B . If you have a Part C plan -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- you will use that card instead .
If you 're enrolled in Medicare , you should have a red , white , and blue Medicare ID card that will cite whether you have Medicare Part A and/or Medicare Part B -LRB- as well as the effective dates for those coverage -RRB- . If you 're not sure where the ID card is or if you have even enrolled in Medicare , you can always contact Medicare directly to find out the information . If you purchased a Medigap plan and/or a standalone Part D prescription drug plan -LRB- PDP -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- , or Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug plan -LRB- MAPD -RRB- , but are unsure what plan you have or need information regarding the plan 's benefits , you would need to contact the agent you purchased the plan -LRB- s -RRB- through or contact the carrier directly for the input . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Once you sign up to receive Medicare benefits -LRB- this can be done online at the social security website , ssa.gov -RRB- , they will send you your Medicare card -LRB- it 's a red , white , and blue card -RRB- in the mail . I do n't believe they allow you to download one to print off . Mailing the card to you is the standard procedure .
How Employer Health Insurance started ? 1920-1930 : The Rising Price of Medical Care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . The AHA designed the Blue Cross guidelines so as to reduce price competition among hospitals . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield The market for health insurance exploded in size in the 1940s , growing from a total enrollment of 20 million in 1940 to nearly 142 million in 1950 . During WWII there was a wage freeze however the Federal government permitted employees to provide benefits instead of wages . Companies began offering health insurance to employees and the employer sponsored health insurance market exploded .
In the 1920 's changes occurred that tended to increase the role that medicine played in people 's lives and to shift the focus of treatment from homes to hospitals . These changes caused the price of medical care to rise because of : Advances in medical technology Growing acceptance of medicine as a science Development of hospitals as treatment centers Encouragement for sick people to visit physicians and hospitals . Licensing and standards of care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield . That is where health insurance began
Medicare Benefits are started automatically the first day of the month you turn 65 if you are already getting benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . Youll get your red , white and blue Medicare card in the mail 3 months before your 65th birthday . If youre not getting Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board and youre close to 65 , youll need to sign up . You can contact Social Security 3 months before you turn 65 , the month of your 65 birthday and 3 months after the month you turn 65 . Generally you wont pay a premium for Part A ; Part B will be deducted out of your Social Security Benefits and is based on your income . If you are still covered by your employers insurance you can decline your Part B coverage and save yourself that cost and apply later when your employer coverage ends . Once you have Medicare there are 2 main ways to get your Medicare coverage , there is Original Medicare or Medicare Advantage Plans . To keep thing simple if you chose Original Medicare you must buy a Part D Prescription Drug Coverage and you may also want to purchase Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . One thing to remember is that all Medigap policys with the same letter are identical in coverage the only difference is the price they charge you so shop around with a broker that represents multiple companies . If you chose Medicare Advantage its very similar to employer insurance where you have to see doctors that accept the insurance and there are small co-pays . Most Advantage plans include Medicare prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- and have low and sometimes no monthly premiums .
Medicare Plus Blue PPO is a Medicare Supplemental Plan insurance provider in Michigan . It is an arm of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Blue Care Network of Michigan . To find out more about the health insurance offered by Medicare Plus Blue PPO visit their website at WEBSITELINK .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
Blue Cross is an insurance carrier . In most states Blue will write Medicare supplement plans and in some areas they will offer MAPD -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- plans . When you have original Medicare you can buy a Medigap plan from Blue or any other carrier . Blue MAPD plans are a form of privatized Medicare .
Usually life insurance is sold by a blue cross blue shield organization affliiated company only in a group plan format . . By affiliated company , I mean a private company associated with Blue Cross Blue Shield as there may be some restrictions on the Blue Cross Blue Shield organization that prevents direct sales .
The Health Insurance Claim Number -LRB- HICN -RRB- is your ID number for Medicare claims . If you have your red , white and blue medicare card , it is the number -LRB- and letters -RRB- with your name . It is a combination of a number representing the primary person responsible for the Medicare insurance -LRB- often the social security number -RRB- followed by one or two letters or numbers to represent the relationship to the primary person .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Medicare HMO Blue would , most likely , be a Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- plan . Medicare Advantage plans , like Medicare HMO Blue , take the place of traditional Medicare Parts A & B and are sold through private insurance companies that are contracted annually through Medicare to offer these plans . For people on Medicare , Advantage plans are an alternative to having `` original '' Medicare .
Blue Cross operates under several names around the country so the exact carrier that you would be purchasing it through depends on where you live -LRB- e.g. Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield , CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield , etc. -RRB- . You can buy the health insurance during the annual open enrollment period -LRB- starts in November this year -RRB- - if you have a qualifying event , you can purchase health insurance under a special enrollment period . I always recommend buying your health insurance through a broker as there are many products to choose from making the process of buying coverage confusing and very time consuming - insurance brokers do not charge fees for their services so you can only help yourself . If you prefer to do it on your own , you can complete the process through the health insurance exchanges via healthcare.gov . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can laminate your Medicare card ; there is no ruling against doing so . The Social Security Administration advises against laminating your Social Security card because of security features built into the card . But the Medicare card does not have these features , so your Medicare card can be laminated . Some feel that it interferes with scanning , but there is usually no problem with scanning a laminated card .
Medicare Blue PPO is a Prefered Provider Health Insurance or Medicare Advantage Plan offered by one of the Blue Cross / Blue Shield family of companies . With a PPO you can go to any doctor who accepts Medicare but you pay lower copay 's if you stay in the network . Many companies offer PPO 's .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Walmart Provide Health Insurance For Employees ?
This is a great question . Most employers dictate what qualifies an employee for benefits . Factors can be if you are full or part time , hours worked etc. and there may be a waiting period . I tell everyone that they have the option to get their own individual health plan and in the event that you change careers , you wo n't have to worry about your health plan ending .
This article lists the benefits offered to full time Walmart employees : WEBSITELINK . There is a provision for short and long term disability insurance coverage with the health plan benefits offered by Walmart . Full time Walmart employees are called Walmart Associates and these benefits are extended to Associates .
Walmart does accept Medicare Part B. Qualified Medicare recipients can purchase durable medical equipment , medical supplies , and other items covered by Medicare Part B in the Walmart pharmacy area . Walmart also is a participating provider in most Medicare Part D plans , and you can purchase drugs covered under Medicare Part D in a Walmart pharmacy .
I believe at one time Walmart did have all of it 's employees covered by small life policies with Walmart as the beneficiary . When this program came to public light , Walmart received very negative publlicity and attention from the Federal government . The rules have since changed and an employeee must now consent to being insured .
The simplest way to think ofhealth insurance exchanges is think of them like a Walmart , Target , Cosco , Kroger , etc. or even more similar - Amazon.com.Thehealth exchange is an online place to shop for health insurance , where insurance companies -LRB- like Blue Cross , Humana , UnitedOne , etc -RRB- can elect to have their health plans available for enrollmentSome states have their own exchanges in which they received federal dollars to operate , while other states opted for the federal government to handle the exchange through healthcare.gov . Just as anyone can walk into a Walmart or log on to Amazon.com , anyone can log on to an exchange and shop for health insurance . The plans on the exchange may be limited in the number of doctors & hospitals in the network in order to save premium dollars . For example , in TN , BCBS launched their `` E '' network , which has roughly 5000 providers state wide , where their other networks have ~ 45,000 & ~ 55,000 providers . The premiums for the `` E '' network are significantly lower . An insurance company may have addition plans available if you purchase directly through them . This is typically called off-marketplace , while enrolling through the exchange is on-marketplace . So ... if you had more choices off-marketplace , why would anyone want to enroll in a plan through the marketplace/health insurance exchange ? You can only obtain the government premium subsidy through the exchange . In other words , depending on your income , you could pay less through the marketplace . When you register , for example at healthcare.gov , there will be an opportunity for you to input your income from the previous year . If you are under 400 % -LRB- about $ 44k for individual -RRB- you could qualify for the subsidy , reducing the premium you would have to pay for your plan . After the insurance company receives your part of the payment , the insurance company tells the government you have paid & then the government pays the subsidy , so you get immediate relief . One final thought ... open enrollment ended 03/31 , so unless you have lost coverage involuntarily or had another qualifying event , you would be ineligible to enroll in individual health insurance until the next open enrollment .
As Peggy indicated , Medicare Part B does not cover incontinence diapers . This means there are no discounts , even if you purchase from a Medicare approved DME provider that accepts assignment . Many retailers such as Target and Walmart will carrier adult diapers and have good pricing . You should also consider warehouse clubs such as Costco and Sams as well as online retailers including Amazon .
I depends on where you go . It could be anywhere from $ 75 to $ 200 . You need to call around in your area . Walmart usually has good prices on basic eye exams . You will pay more for an ophthalmologist than an optometrist . Unless you think you have a problem such as cataracts , an optometrist can prescribe you with no problem .
The shingles shot isnt covered by Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- . Generally , Medicare prescription drug plans -LRB- Part D -RRB- cover all commercially-available vaccines -LRB- like the shingles shot -RRB- needed to prevent illness . Zostavax -LRB- PF -RRB- is a Tier 4 medication under all three Humana Stand Alone PDPs Humana Walmart PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Preferred Rx PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Enhanced PDP has a 44 % coinsurance -LRB- this plan has no deductible -RRB-
It is never to late to plan for retirement . The earlier you start , the easier it is to make sure you have the money to maintain the lifestyle you want and desire . If you do no planing or do not save enough , you might get what I like to refer to as the `` blue vest '' retirement . Hence you see retired people working at Walmart as greeters as well as other market places . There are many options these days to make sure you will have the money , not run out of money you need for retirement . Take the first step now , make a call to your local adviser or at least due some research making sure who you are talking to or the material you are reading is credible .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
There are many venues online , in malls , at Walmart , where you can shop for term life insurance . But to be sure youre selecting from the most competitive term life insurance market place , you need to use independent brokers that have contracts with all the leading term life insurance companies in the country . We can help with that .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
There remains a lot of confusion over this issue in the wake of the passing of the health care reform law -LRB- ObamaCare , the Affordable Care Act -RRB- and justifiably so . Technically speaking , ObamaCare does not force any employer to offer health insurance to their employees , their is no criminal penalty for failure to do so . That point made , the Affordable Care Act consists of a mix of tax incentives and tax penalties to supposedly induce employers to provide health insurance for their employees . First of all , for employers with 2 to49 employees there are no tax penalties at all for failure to provide health insurance to their employees . A tax credit is offered but with enough limitations associated with it that only a tiny percentage of small employers have ever taken advantage of it . For employers who are at and above the 50 full time and/or full time equivalent employee level they will be the ones who will be faced with tax penalties for failing to provide health insurance and/or failing to provide affordable health insurance to their employees . The first employers to be impacted will be those with 100 or more full time employees in 2015 . Then , starting in 2016 , employers in the 50 to 99 employee range will be subject to the same tax penalty . The tax penalty will be $ 2000 per employee per year and will be a non-deductible business expense . Not surprisingly , the situation is more complicated than I have just described but there is not space here to go into all the details involved . Suffice it to say , this is an issue of great concern to many employers , especially ones who have not offered health insurance to their employees or a large segment of their employees in the past . The restaurant , hospitality and trucking industries are some common examples of industries that can expect to be adversely impacted financially by the tax penalty . For consultation on this issue please feel free to contact me .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
How Employer Health Insurance started ? 1920-1930 : The Rising Price of Medical Care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . The AHA designed the Blue Cross guidelines so as to reduce price competition among hospitals . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield The market for health insurance exploded in size in the 1940s , growing from a total enrollment of 20 million in 1940 to nearly 142 million in 1950 . During WWII there was a wage freeze however the Federal government permitted employees to provide benefits instead of wages . Companies began offering health insurance to employees and the employer sponsored health insurance market exploded .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
Group health insurance is a health insurance policy or plan -LRB- depending upon how it is funded -RRB- that is provided by an employer for its employees or through an organization such as a labor union for its members . In a group health insurance policy situation the employer is the actual policy holder and its employees and covered dependents are subscribers who receive a certificate of coverage . In this context the employee 's health insurance is tied to their place of employment and while -LRB- depending upon the size of the group -RRB- there are state and federal laws that allow for an ex-employee to continue their coverage through the group plan for some defined period of time , eventually a former employee will lose access to their ex-employer 's group plan and have to replace it coverage from a new employer or individual health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 group health insurance is in many ways more complicated than ever before . For instance , employers in the 2 to 50 employee market segment in the vast majority of statesnow operate in a community rated situation and are finding that new benefit plan designs are being presented to them that may differ significantly from their current rate structures and plan designs . Fully insured ACA compliant health plans for the 2 to 50 market segment are now guaranteed to be issued , are not subject to underwriting and can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods -LRB- just to highlight some of the most major changes -RRB- . Larger sized groups , while they are certainly impacted by the effects of the ACA , are still operating under a mix of the old rules and the new ones . So , right now groups with 51 + employees are still subject to underwriting , though the new ACA rules will be migrating up the ladder to apply to groups in the 51 to 99 employee range in the future . There will be groups who will be winners and losers under the requirements of the ACA and depending upon the composition of the group and its average income levels for its workforce , some employers may find that providing group health insurance is no longer in the best financial interest of many of their employees when compared with the subsidized individual health insurance that many of their employees could qualify for . If you are an employer faced with these issues and are looking for experienced guidance on these matters please feel free to contact me for a consultation .
No American employer is required to provide health insurance to their employees . What the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- imposes is an employer mandate that employers of certain sizes must offer their employees health insurance that meets certain minimum essential benefit coverage requirements and an affordability level to the employee . If such an employer chooses not to offer group health insurance to their employees the employer will be subject to an employer mandate tax penalty charged on a per employee basis . In 2015 employers with 100 + employees will be subject to this requirement with the size threshold dropping to 50 + employees in 2016 . Employers with less than 50 employees are not required to offer coverage . While on the face of it the employer mandate would seem to be an incentive for larger employers to offer health insurance to their employees it 's true effects are yet to be seen and are quite debatable . For example , the cost of the tax penalty is generally far less than the cost of insuring an employee thus perhaps creating an incentive to take the lower cost of the tax penalty and to send your employees to the health insurance marketplaces to buy their own coverage .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much For Full Coverage Car Insurance ?
The only way to find out is to request an actual quote , there are too many variables for anyone to be able to give you a price unless you request a quote and give them all your information . Also , it 's important to understand that there 's no such thing as `` Full Coverage '' . There is Liability coverage which covers you in case you damage someone 's property or injure another person . There is Collision coverage which pays for repairs to your vehicle in case of an accident . There is also Other Than Collision coverage which pays for repairs to your vehicle in case something other than a collision happens . When people say `` Full Coverage '' they 're usually referring to a combination of Liability , Collision , Comprehensive and a few other overages .
As I illustrated recently to a class of high school freshmen , that is really a complicated question but let me clarify full-coverage first . Insurance agents only use that term when someone else introduces the subject . We know that full-coverage does not mean that the insurance company will make everything right all the time . Policies have limits , claims are adjusted and there are a great many places where there could be misunderstandings . An insurance policy has two major sections , liability and property damage . Many people think that if they have coverage in both sections they have full-coverage . If they cause an accident and people are injured , they might well be sued . The liability portion of the policy will stand between them and the injured party until the judgments and expenses exceed the liability limits written in their policy . These limits can range from $ 15,000 to over $ 1 million . So if someone is injured and sues and wins a judgment in the amount of $ 50,000 , your full-coverage policy might not meet your needs and the court might be looking at your other assets to satisfy the judgment . A similar disagreement can arise with property damage . This is settled on actual cash value , unless you have a rare policy with agreed value coverage . There are two problems which present themselves . You might really love your little Ford Focus that you bought two years ago and when it is damaged disagree with the adjuster on the value of the car . When the car is inspected the adjuster may decide that the car can not be repaired economically . The adjusted value presented will probably be less than you expected because there is a deductible which will be taken out of the settlement . Again , your full-coverage policy may not cover you in the way that you want . However , you asked about cost and in California the cost is dependent on the year , make and model of the vehicle , where the vehicle is registered , the driving record of the members of the household , the annual mileage of the vehicle , and then the coverages that you select . Companies offer discounts and sometimes assess penalties based on driving histories , other types of coverage , the occupation of the principal operator and other factors . The answer to how much it costs is , it depends .
A hybrid life insurance policy blends both non-medical and fully underwritten coverage . The idea is you get a portion of the death benefit being applied for as full coverage without an exam -LRB- the rest being AD&D coverage -RRB- and the rest turns into full coverage after an exam is completed and you 're approved . The initial process can be completed in just a few days -LRB- typically 48 hours or so -RRB- - when the exam is completed , it can take a few weeks for the underwriting to be wrapped up . Once the initial non-medical coverage is in force , you can then decide to take an exam to turn the rest of the coverage into full coverage -LRB- you generally have a window of about 6 months to complete the exam - can vary by carrier -RRB- . Even if you come up with poor numbers and are declined for the rest of the coverage being turned into full coverage , you can still keep the initial format of the plan because it 's already in force . It 's probably easier to envision with an example . If you apply for $ 250,000 of coverage with a 20-year term period under a hybrid life policy and you 're approved for the non-medical side -LRB- again , typically takes only a couple of days -RRB- , only a portion of the coverage will be full coverage . So let 's say the coverage is actually $ 100,000 of full coverage and $ 150,000 is AD&D -LRB- actual ratios will vary by carrier -RRB- . This means that if you died without completing the exam and getting the rest of the coverage approved , only $ 100,000 would be paid out instead of the full $ 250,000 . The only way the full $ 250,000 would be paid is if you died under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . It sounds like a great idea on paper , right ? You 're getting coverage quickly and you 've got something locked in in case you ca n't qualify for the full coverage transition . There 's a huge issue with this type of program !!!! The RATE PER $ 1,000 of full coverage that you 're paying under a hybrid life policy can -LRB- and likely will be -RRB- A LOT higher than you would be paying for coverage under a traditional life policy - meaning you can end up spending a ton of extra money on premiums unnecessarily that could easily be in your own pocket . The chances of a claim for AD&D coverage is slim to none . You 're most likely to die from illness than you are to die from injury . *** You want to be paying the lowest cost per $ 1,000 of full coverage - this is the key point you want to look at when you 're buying your coverage . *** Think about it this way . If you 've got a $ 250,000 non-medical policy and a $ 250,000 hybrid policy , and the premium for the hybrid policy is less , you 're actually paying a much higher rate because only a portion of the face amount is full coverage , where as the entire face amount under the regular non-med policy is 100 % full coverage . But you can just take the exam and turn it into full coverage right ? Problem solved ? - NO !!! If you 're willing to take an exam in the first place , you may as well have just done a traditional fully underwritten program to start with , because the premiums for those programs are substantially less than they are for hybrid policies and you have full coverage from day 1 . The long and short of it is this - if you do n't want to take an exam , buy a non-medical policy . If you 're willing to take an exam to lower your premiums or secure a higher amount of coverage , apply for a fully underwritten program because you 're going to get much better rates . The idea with hybrid policies is to try to get the best of both worlds , but the process just does n't make much sense with how much you 're spending for full coverage . I hope this provides some clarification for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
As I illustrated recently to a class of high school freshmen , that is really a complicated question but let me clarify full-coverage first . Insurance agents only use that term when someone else introduces the subject . We know that full-coverage does not mean that the insurance company will make everything right all the time . Policies have limits , claims are adjusted and there are a great many places where there could be misunderstandings . An insurance policy has two major sections , liability and property damage . Many people think that if they have coverage in both sections they have full-coverage . If they cause an accident and people are injured , they might well be sued . The liability portion of the policy will stand between them and the injured party until the judgments and expenses exceed the liability limits written in their policy . These limits can range from $ 15,000 to over $ 1 million . So if someone is injured and sues and wins a judgment in the amount of $ 50,000 , your full-coverage policy might not meet your needs and the court might be looking at your other assets to satisfy the judgment . A similar disagreement can arise with property damage . This is settled on actual cash value , unless you have a rare policy with agreed value coverage . There are two problems which present themselves . You might really love your little Ford Focus that you bought two years ago and when it is damaged disagree with the adjuster on the value of the car . When the car is inspected the adjuster may decide that the car can not be repaired economically . The adjusted value presented will probably be less than you expected because there is a deductible which will be taken out of the settlement . Again , your full-coverage policy may not cover you in the way that you want . However , you asked about cost and in California the cost is dependent on the year , make and model of the vehicle , where the vehicle is registered , the driving record of the members of the household , the annual mileage of the vehicle , and then the coverages that you select . Companies offer discounts and sometimes assess penalties based on driving histories , other types of coverage , the occupation of the principal operator and other factors . The answer to how much it costs is , it depends .
Life insurance can cover death in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- Full coverage 2 -RRB- AD&D Full coverage means that the life insurance policy will pay out a death benefit regardless of whether death occurs by illness -LRB- including old age & natural causes -RRB- or injury . This is the most common type of life insurance that is purchased because a person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are by an injury -LRB- e.g. car accident or a plane crash -RRB- . AD&D is short for Accidental Death & Dismemberment . This kind of life insurance , while typically cheaper than full coverage , only pays out a death benefit if death occurs due to injury -LRB- the types of injuries that are covered may be outlined in the plan as opposed to general language -RRB- . Given that the average person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are from injuries , full coverage is a much more desired option for people . If a person dies by illness and has an AD&D policy , this coverage will not pay out a death benefit . It 's important to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to compare your options and help you determine the type , amount , and length of coverage that will be most suitable to your needs and budget and which carrier can offer that coverage at the lowest rates . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an experienced life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a term insurance policy may be more suitable to the need than a permanent policy . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Once you 've figured out how much coverage you want and how long you need it for , you then need to find the carrier 's program that is going to offer the coverage at the lowest possible cost . This is where the risk classification comes in . This is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also want to make sure of the type of coverage you have - full coverage or Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- . With full coverage , the proceeds are paid out whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under an AD&D policy , the policy only pays out if you die by a specified circumstance -LRB- e.g. a car crash -RRB- - if you die by illness and you have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit . This is important because people see the price of an AD&D policy and it looks very attractive because it 's cheap . That 's because you 're more likely to die by illness than you are of an injury . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For the most part , when someone refers to `` full coverage '' car insurance , they are referring to a policy that provides two key elements of coverage . Physical Damage protection for your car in the form of both Comprehensive and Collision is one of these , and Liability is the other . Some companies provide `` Single Limit '' Liability coverage meaning that both bodily injury and property damage coverage are combined in the same total pool . Others provide `` split limit '' meaning that you have a certain stated amount of coverage for Bodily Injury protection and a separate stated amount for Property Damage . In many states , a third element is required along with Liability in order to register your car and that is commonly referred to as `` Uninsured Motorist/Underinsured Motorist '' coverage . This provides benefits to you and your family members if you are injured as a result of an accident caused by someone operating a car with no or limited liability insurance . These areas consitute the main portions of a `` full coverage '' policy , but there may also be additional elements . Primary Medical payment , roadside assistance , rental car reimbursement , full glass , etc may also be included for example .
Very rarely will a reputable car dealership even let you leave the lot with out proof of insurance that is full coverage . Even if you traded in your old car with a new car and the old one had full coverage on it you have limited coverage for the new car with some carriers it will only cover the amount of what the value was for the old car you traded in . I would recommend always prior to even shopping for a car you shop for the insurance rates on the new car and make sure you are properly protected .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
All insurance auto policies are the same they all have liability which is damage to other . Then you have optional coverage of un insured and under insured and medical pay then of course the option of `` Full '' coverage which really is not the best choice of words for coverage but that is coverage that repairs your auto in the even of a loss minus the deductible . The best coverage would be to have higher limits and full coverage . How ever you budget needs to thought about also . If you are purchasing all the coverage and ca n't afford the higher deductible then full coverage may not be the best option for you . Before you ever purchase a car or insurance shop around call a local agent and discuss what options you have . Many agencies demand that you have certain limits which is recommended to have the higher limits but it is pointless if you ca n't afford the higher limits because if it means eating or insurance well you going to choose food . Talk to an agent who will listen to your concerns and find you the most affordable rate and coverage that your desire . Online quotes can sometime be lower but the service sometimes is not as well as an agent example at our agency you can reach us 24/7 we never want you to ever have to call a 800 number and talk to a stranger .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question ! Most commonly , you will be required to carry full coverage insurance on the car idf the car has been purchased through a lender . So that they are not out their investment in your car , they will often require the full coverage on the car . You may also need it for company vehicles , but lenders most commonly . Thank you for asking !
Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
It 's very difficult to say what you should be paying for life insurance because it depends on a number of factors and we all have our own needs and budgets . There 's many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs . The risk class is the MOST critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of items including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is the type of policy you 're looking to secure - how much coverage do you want/need and for how long do you want/need it guaranteed for -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an experienced broker to see what programs are available and what structure would be most suitable to best serve your needs . We have in-depth knowledge of products from many different carriers and can help you through the entire process of securing life insurance from figuring out how much coverage you need and how long to placing the coverage in force and beyond . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
This one 's pretty simple if you have a good agent with a well trained staff . Simply call them up and tell them you 're replacing a car . To make sure they have everything they need have this information : Year , make and model of new car Full 17 digit VIN When you got your new car When you got rid of your old car Talk about the coverage you want : Comp & Collision ? Deductibles Anything special added to the car If it 's financed or leased , they 'll need to know the name , address , and loan or lease number of the finance or leasing company How you 'd like to receive your certificate of insurance Also at this time , it might be a good idea to ask what the premiums will be so you can budget for it . If you have n't sold your old car yet , do n't take the coverage off it . This is important . If you let someone test drive your car and they get in an accident or hurt someone , you want to be sure your covered . The premium you 'll pay for that short period of time is worth it .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Long Does An Auto Insurance Claim Stay On Record ?
Great Question . Usally a car claim stays on your insurance record for 5 years . Most insurance companies do not charge you for that accident if it is past 3 years . Some companies do not charge you for an accident if it is less than $ 1000 payout so check with your particular insurance company .
It can take from hours to months to be approved for life insurance . If you are applying for a simplified issue policy that requires no exam or medical records , can be signed digitally and approved on the phone , it may go into effect very quickly . The cons : this type of policy does not dig too deep , and can decline you very easily if you do not fit their exact criteria . They also usually charge higher rates to cover the risk of not knowing everything about you . The pros are that you get by without the hassle of an exam and can get the coverage very quickly . When applying for a larger policy that does require an exam and medical records , the time in underwriting largely depends on when you schedule your exam and how long it takes for your doctor 's office to send your records to the life insurance company . Another thing that can hold up approval is if you saw a doctor that the underwriter wants input from , but records were not ordered from that doctor , or the doctor has left and no one knows where those records are . Finally , an insurance website or agency that is not skilled at working this type of case can slow things down by simply not knowing how to stay on top of cases like this . To speed up approvals for a case involving exam and medical records : 1 -RRB- use an agent who has experience in impaired risk underwriting ; 2 -RRB- list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , and all doctors who made your diagnoses ; 3 -RRB- schedule your exam ASAP ; 4 -RRB- notify your doctors that medical records will be ordered , or obtain the records yourself ; and 5 -RRB- answer all questions from your agent and/or case manager promptly . These tips can cut the time for approval , even in a complicated case , from months to weeks .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
A life insurance underwriter is someone who evaluates the risk of issuing a policy based on many factors , of which the main one is life expectancy . The person making this evaluation used to write their name under the definition of the risk , thus came the title , `` underwriter '' . It is a very difficult job as life insurance carriers have many regulations to follow , they must charge wisely so their company stays solvent , and they must know a realm of health information in addition to being astute financially . Therefore , there are often underwriting teams , including medical doctors , when a life insurance company covers a broad range of risk . Not only do underwriters look at medical risk , but since 9-11 they also must be sure that the face amount applied for fits the financial means of the applicant , because life insurance can be used by terrorists for money laundering . They look at pharmacy records , driving records , and MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- . Some policies do not require any exam or medical records , some skip the exam but still have the option to order medical records , some just order exam and rarely order medical records , and some routinely order both . All these steps together ensure that the proper rating is given and that the life insurance company will be able to pay all out all its claims .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I have been selling auto insurance for 23 years andi can tell you , they all do . It really depends on your circumstances . I have worked for two captive companies and now I sell for manydifferent companies . Many things going into determining your price . Your driving record , your credit , how many cars you own , your age , what kind of car , the coverage you choose , how long you have been insured with the same company . It is good to shop around , but it is also good to stay with the same company for at least 3-5 years to get the bestprice the next time your shop . Call at least 3 for quotes .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Oh wow , unfortunately there is no black and white answer to this question . It varies drastically from carrier to carrier but also from claim to claim . Your actual claim will determine a lot about how long the process will take to full resolution . If it is a simple `` fender bender '' where things are pretty cut and dry , you are talking a matter of a couple of days ... with our carriers and on claims like this as soon as the field adjustor can get out to inspect the car , they are usually cutting a check on the spot . If seen claims like this close in a day , but also have seem them take a couple of days to close simply due to scheduling issues . More serious claims take longer . If fault is in questions and police reports have to be pulled , this takes time . If there are serious injuries or death , these take a lot of time . Typically you do n't have to wait until the claim is settled to start the repairs on your vehicle . If you car is `` totaled '' you might have to wait until it is settled . Each claim and carrrier is different and you have the right to stay informed about the process . Your adjustor will no more than your agent so stay in contact with them and ask them direct questions about the length of time things should take and what you should expect during the process . Contact your local independent agent and ask them specifics on the claims process of their carriers .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
This is a very relevant question because there is not a black-and-white answer to it . Lets suppose you have a family where mom does stay at home with the kids . Tragically , she dies . What is the best possible thing that can happen with these kids ? Really , its for dad to stay home with them . Theyve already lost mom . They are going to need their dad more than they ever have . He is THE parent . Dad may want to keep working and hire a Mary Poppins-type nanny , but that is the second best solution by far . He really should stay home from work to the greatest extent possible and just connect and bond and nurture and comfort these kids through what may be the most devastating occurrence in their life . Obviously , he will need money to be able to afford to stay home . That is what I think is the number one function of life insurance on a stay-at-home mom . This is a hard sell to insurance companies these days , because they keep thinking in terms of percentage of the wager earners coverage , and on and on . But if I get a couple who really want dad to stay home if the family does lose mom , I fight hard to get them a policy to make that happen .
Minor traffic tickets usually just stay on your driving record for three years . More serious traffic violations can stay on your driving record for insurance companies to see for 10 years or more , even a lifetime . However , life insurance companies do not consider traffic tickets or violations that occurred before a certain amount of time . You should be able to get a Preferred rate now .
Unless things have changed Geico only covers auto insurance . If you own your home it would be wise to shop around , Many companies offer Auto and Home discounts . I also recommend going with a company that allows you to have a local agent . While the adds talk about saving money because you save commissions to an agent my experience has shown this to be a stretch of the facts . A local agent can be a big help if you need an advocate in an insurance claim . He can also give you sound advice on whether or not a claim should even be turned in . Most people do not realize that if you call a company and ask about a claim it will be in your records regardless of whether you actually turn in the claim or not . Having a local agent can help you with out it affecting you insurance record .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
No ! Dave Ramsey is not a fan of annuities . Dave 's generic advice is to invest in `` good quality mutual funds , with a long track record '' and to stay invested , even through your retirement years . I happen to disagree with his advice , and with his stand on annuities . -LRB- For the record , I can show you mathematically how following his advice through any of the major market downturns we 've suffered would have left you dead broke . -RRB- You have to remember , an annuity , like any other financial product , has a purpose . The purpose of an annuity is , among other things , to provide a stream of income that is guaranteed . When used appropriately , an annuity can be a valuable tool .
The time it takes to get life insurance is from a few hours , to a few months . If you apply for a No Exam policy with a company that does not order medical records , the processing time is usually a few days to a few weeks . Some are put into effect shortly after applying via phone interview . If you apply for a policy that requires paramed exam and medical records , the amount of time that it takes to go into effect will depend on how soon you take the exam , and how soon your medical records come in . The underwriter usually waits until everything is in before reviewing your case . If at review time , he or she finds that you had seen another doctor , they might order additional records , which causes further delay . It is helpful to list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , or else even collect medical records yourself , in order to get your policy in effect ASAP .
I am so glad you asked this question . Life insurance is an underwriting-driven sale . A well-managed underwriting process will yield both good pricing and good service . This is what you need to keep the client satisfied . The underwriter has the final word . At the same time , the client , the broker , the general agent , the case manager and the underwriter all collaborate in making things happen . In addition , third-parties such as physicians offices , and advisers such as accountants and attorneys and bankers , all have a role to play . Let me give you some examples of how things could work the right way , and also the wrong way . The right way can get you an approval in a matter of weeks . The wrong way can drag it out to months and months and months . First of all , you as the client must go through full disclosure . Answer every question thoroughly and accurately . Make sure you get prequalified so that any underwriting challenges are addressed before you submit a formal application . You might have to clarify elements of your medical history . You might have to give details on risky activities such as mountain climbing a scuba diving . Amendments to physician records may be needed . If all this information is collected up front , then you can benefit in two ways . First of all you can be confident that you have both competitive and reliable quotes . Your application should be approved at the rate quoted . In addition , the underwriting process should run more smoothly because a number of underwriting requirements have already been obtained . If you dont get prequalified , and underwriting challenges are not addressed before hand , then all the time needed to do so will delay the formal underwriting process . It is also important to get the insurance exam completed quickly . Those lab and test results are essential to evaluating the level of risk you present . It may be that your blood chemistry is off the day you take the exam , and that might raise some questions . You might even have to repeat the exam . Or clarification may be needed from your doctor . Better to take care of these items sooner rather than later . The longer you wait in scheduling that exam , the longer the evaluation will take , and the longer it will take to remedy any emerging issues . Medical records are also a dealmaker or a dealbreaker . They too play a huge role in assessing risk . These days many physician offices are short-staffed and overloaded with bureaucratic insurance company and government requirements . They often contract with services to make copies of records . Their turnover of requests for copies of files is often slow . Bear in mind that they are paid in advance and well paid for this service . You as the patient may have to get involved to stress the importance of a faster turnaround . Many times , statements and documents from professional advisors are needed . In one case I have , I obtained a medical approval of great pricing over six months ago . However , copies of trust and buy sell agreement documents are required to get the final approval , and to issue the policies . The attorneys and accountants still havent delivered . General agents play a key role in delivering customer satisfaction . Brokers typically do not deal directly with underwriters - we deal with general agents who operate at the wholesale level . A general agent who has strong leverage with carriers will be able to deliver underwriting concessions . He or she will also be able to intervene as needed and advocate on behalf of the client and broker if snags pop up during underwriting . Things can happen . Sometimes one underwriter will prequalify a case , and another will formally underwrite it . These two may not agree on what the price should be . The general agent needs to stay on top of this and get the dispute resolved as quickly as possible . Case managers are also key . These are personnel inside general agencies who expedite requirements . If they are really on the ball , then the broker is notified promptly of the need for outstanding records , documents , client information , etc. . If they are slack , then requirements are filled too slowly . I think too many agencies just rely on software to give updates . This technology is useful ; at the same time , managers really do need to stay involved personally with cases and move them along . It takes the personal touch . In essence , with the right team approach and cooperation from all involved , then things can happen relatively quickly . The broker needs to treat underwriting as such and provide proper direction . Without this leadership , there is so much room for error that underwriting can become a nightmare .
Most agents and brokers in New York use either the carrier websites or an online rating program to develop auto insurabnce quotes . Somewhere between 50 and 60 pieces of information are required just to select the rating ` tiers ' the carriers use . Some carriers have only 15 to 20tiers and some have over 100 . Your data isentered into the program . The carrier 's program uses this data to selectyour rating tier . Some factors such as : own or rent your home , gender , age , number of years licensed , driving record , credit profile , claims history -LRB- not only auto but property insurance claimsmay also be figured in ... -RRB- and on and on . Several years ago , only your driving record and claims history were the major factors involved . Today , your credit profile has a very major impact on how much you will pay - some carriers will not even develop a quote if your credit profile is not within their tolerances . So keep your credit score and profile as good as possible . Always ask your agent or broker for a ` guaranteed ' quote as some rating programs may not come up with a final ` guaranteed ' quote unless the agent or broker pays some fees for the data retrieval -LRB- of the credit data , claims data , and DMV extracts -RRB- to their system vendor or their carrier . In New York , insurance quote retrievals of your credit data are considered a ` no-hit ' to your credit status so you can ask several compnies to quote your insurance without penalty to your credit .
If you were to hire workers to provide all the services that a stay at home mom performs each day , the cost would be staggering . So it is important not to underestimate how much life insurance to purchase on a stay at home mother or father . However , with most life insurance companies , the stay at home parent will only be able to purchase the amount of coverage that is on their `` working outside the home '' partner . Therefore , when you look at how much insurance to purchase for your family , you will need to look at the whole picture . Most people buy enough life insurance to replace at least 5-10 years of income , or financial value , as in the case of a stay at home mom or dad .
There are a number of reasons to be turned down for life insurance . I have elaborated on them in my article here , along with ways to avoid or correct each problem : WEBSITELINK In summary , they are : 1 -RRB- The product does not cover your health condition or other risk factor -LRB- such as suspended drivers license , recent bankruptcy , dangerous hobby -RRB- 2 -RRB- Your application is incomplete and no one points it out to you 3 -RRB- Something is in your medical records that you are unaware of , that causes you to be declined 4 -RRB- The underwriter asks for more medical records and no one provides them 5 -RRB- You have done everything right but your health does not meet the qualifications Being turned down is a frustrating , heart wrenching experience . You can lessen your chances of being turned down by using an agent or agency that understands your health and risk factors and puts you with the correct product to start with , then follows the underwriting process closely to make sure it is completed properly . Sometimes , though , in trying to get the best price , declines do happen . It is not the end of the world . There is usually something else out there for you . Find yourself an agent who vows to stay the course with you until you get what you need .
end question
start question
annuities
Who Are Annuities Best For ?
Tax deferred annuities are suitable for mid to long term savers or investors , those with high tax brackets or fixed interest rate seekers who desire more returns than traditional bank CDs . Interest rates are only on crediting method available with tax deferred annuities . Other crediting methods use indices in indexed annuities as well as separate sub accounts in variable annuities . To determine the crediting method most suitable for you , consider establishing a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment before purchasing a tax deferred annuity .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
What are deferred annuities best suited for ? The challenge with this question is that the term deferred annuity has at least two `` definitions '' . I will describe two scenarios and if your question is not answered , please do not hesitate to contact me . A deferred annuity can refer to exchanging a lump sum for a guaranteed income at a point in the future . In this situation , a deferred annuity would be suited for someone who wanted a guaranteed flow of income with no management responsibilities . A life annuity may or may not include a guaranteed payout . There are different options , so ask your insurance agent for details . In addition to the income amount , taxation during the the deferral period and of the income flow should be considered . In Canada , a deferred annuity can also refer to Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- and Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- . Both of these are issued by insurance companies and offer the option of an annuity in the future . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they also offer guarantees not offered by other institutions for non-registered investments . These include potential creditor protection and estate planning opportunities , such as bypassing probate . Segregated funds are similar to mutual funds , but they offer maturity and death guarantees . In addition , some segregated funds include the `` locking in '' of gains . Depending on your individual situation , there could also be some tax advantages to these plans . These type of deferred annuities are best suited for individuals who are looking for , and would benefit from , the additional features and guarantees . This is an overview of a potentially complex subject . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me .
It is best to find an independent agent who specializes in annuities . They can help you sort through the hundreds of annuity products out there , and show you a comparison of products well suited for your situation . It is important to use an independent agent who will show you multiple companies . If you go to a specific insurance company , all they will show you are annuities from their company . An independent agent can show you annuities from all of the companies out there . As a consumer , be sure to try your best to have a set of defined goals you can go over with the agent . This will help them find suitable products to show you . You can also do your own homework on the internet . There are many different sites out there that will show annuity comparisons . But as I eluded to before , it is easy to get bogged down in all the info for hundreds of annuities . Some sites try to help by showing what they consider `` consumer friendly '' annuities , such as WEBSITELINK
Who the best Annuity Company is depends on a few different things . Mostly the current annuity market and who currently has the most competitive rates . It also depends on your personal situation and needs and which company offers a product that fits those needs best . In other words , there is no best annuity company , it just depends . But it is important to use a company that has good financial ratings , and `` A '' or better is usually considered a good rating . So whichever well rated company offers the most competitive product that fits your needs , is the best company .
Anyone can use an annuity . If you 're asking who is most likely to benefit most from an annuity that answer would be anyone who needs a stable , predictable , and reliable income stream . Another type of person who benefits from owning an annuity is anyone who believes they will live a long time as annuities can provide income that lasts for ones lifetime even if the income stream is more than the initial money in the annuity .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
This can vary depending on the type of Annuity . Deferred Fixed Annuities currently pay anywhere from 2 % for a 3 year contract , up to 3 % for a 6 year contract . An Immediate Fixed Annuity -LRB- which pays a percentage based income for life on the amount you invest in the Annuity -RRB- currently pay up to 6.42 % for a 65 year old , all the way up to 9 % for a 75 year old . It is best to work with an independent annuity expert who can shop the current rates and give you the best company and best product available on the market .
It all depends on your risk tolerance and financial needs . Fixed annuities are well suited for a conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns . Indexed Annuities are well suited for a conservative to semi-conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns with the opportunity for a higher return than a fixed annuity . Variable Annuities are well suited for an investor who does not mind taking on the risk of loss . A person should carefully asses their risk tolerance and realistically how much loss they are willing to withstand before investing in a Variable Annuity . Annuities can be a great idea depending on your retirement savings needs .
The annuity offerings change all the time . The best today maybe not be the best tomorrow . Annuities are categorized into basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Sentinel is a very good fixed interest rate annuity company . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Genworth is a very good index annuity company . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money . Prudential is a very good variable annuity company .
The main risk people face with fixed annuities is the buying power of the payments you receive because they do not have a cost of living adjustment -LRB- COLA -RRB- built in . Annuities offering COLAs are available , but generally require a higher premium to account for the increase in payments . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
