start question
renters-insurance
How Much Is Renters Insurance Per Month For An Apartment ?
How much renters insurance premiums are depends allot on what coverage 's you wish to purchase . You may be able to get a renters insurance policy for as low as $ 10.00 a month and go up from there . There are additional discounts if you package with your auto insurance carrier as well .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
The average cost is much lower than you might think . People living in apartments in Fresno , California can buy a renters policy for less than $ 10 per month . That will provide around $ 20,000 of protection for personal property and $ 300,000 for liability protection in the event of personal injury and property damage . The policies are transferrable when you move from apartment to apartment and many companies will discount a homeowners policy when you have had a renters policy with them .
Yes an apartment complex can require you to obtain renters insurance as a condition of renting their apartment . What apartments are concerned about is liability protection . Should the tenant be liable for bodily injury or property damage the apartment complex does not want to be the first in line to be sued for something the tenant caused . Instead the tenants renters insurance policy will defend against the loss first . The apartment complex will not care if you chose to carry coverage for your own personal property . Also on a side note if the tenant did not carry renters insurance and was sued for a loss , just because the apartment complex may have to defend does not give a free pass to the tenant . Your still going to court and it can cost you thousands . Renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers you for so much . Buy it .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
Renters insurance is a must have for everyone who rents a home or apartment and it 's very inexpensive . Renters insurance typically cost between $ 100 - $ 200 per year depending on how much personal property coverage you need . Renters insurance will cover your belongings and provide liability coverage . Renters insurance even covers personal property away from your home or apartment . For example , someone breaks into your car and steels your iPad . Most policies limit coverage away from your residence premise to 10 % but the example would be a covered loss .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Why some apartments require renters insurance can vary . First , lets cover what renters insurance covers . It covers your personal property , your liability and medical expenses . Second , your liability and medical coverage are the parts that are most important to the apartment . This is because your liability insurance can be used to cover damage done to the building due to your negligence . For example , lets say you leave the stove on and you leave your apartment . Lets further say it starts a fire and causes damage to the building . The apartment 's insurance will pay for the damages , but then it will subrogate against your insurance -LRB- meaning it will make a claim against your renters coverage -RRB- . Therefore , many apartment complexes ' insurance companies will require that all the tenants have a renters policy so it can recoup any of its losses caused by the apartment complex 's tenants .
Tenants should have renters insurance to insure the contents inside their apartment as well provide insurance should they cause the structure to be damaged by fire , flood or smoke . If you are the tenant in an apartment and accidently do somthing in your apartment that damages anothers personal property and or the building , you could be held liable for the damage . Most renters insurance offers a minimum of 25000 in contents coverage and 300,000 in personal liability coverage . This insurance generally costs about $ 20,00 per month . Keith Prim Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
You need renters insurance when you have something to loose . That something could be more than your stuff . It could be the reasonable rent you have . If there were a fire , and you had to leave for another apartment , you might have to pay more rent . LOSS OF USE is a coverage built in to the policy . If you have to leave your 2 bedroom , second floor apartment where you pay $ 500 a month because of a fire , you can move into a similar apartment and if that similar apartment cost more , LOSS OF USE will pay for the extra -LRB- above $ 500 -RRB- rent . It will not pay for you to move into a four bedroom penthouse apartment . That 's not similar . If a friend or someone else visits , goes to the bathroom and slips on the floor they could get injured ... badly . A renters policy includes two important coverages : MEDICAL PAYMENTS and BODILY INJURY LIABILITY . MEDICAL PAYMENTS would pay hospital or doctor expenses necessary to treat your friend . The limit is usually $ 1,000 but you can buy more and it 's cheap . If your friend gets a lawyer and sues you , BODILY INJURY LIABILIYT will pay for an attorney to defend you AND pay the damages if you lose . The limits generally start at $ 100,000 , but check the price for higher limits as it also is cheap . Finally , there is your stuff . Maybe it 's used and worn and you do n't think it 's worth a lot . But if you had to go out and buy EVERYTHING all over again , it would be expensive . You can buy insurance that will replace your old stuff with new stuff . You just have to make sure you have REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE . REMEMBER : Insurance does not cover everything for every imaginable kind of claim . There are limits and exclusions . They are generally the same from company to company . Find an agent you can talk to and ask questions . Good Luck Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers 877-414-2031 WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance in most locations is fairly inexpensive . Premiums for a renters insurance policy for an apartment will typically be lower than for a single family home . Based on my experience within my geographic location I have seen a renters insurance policy have a premium as little as about ten dollars per month .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
How much money would you need to replace your personal property ? If someone is hurt or property is damaged and you are legally liable , how much coverage do you want from your insurance company ? Your answer to these will set the price of a tenants policy . Tenants policies are quite inexpensive . For someone with $ 20,000 of contents living in an apartment in Fresno , CA , you could expect to pay around $ 10-20 per month .
Renter insurance makes a lot of sense . If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle . Yes it makes sense to buy renters insurance .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
As and Insurance agent I would have to say yes it should be required . As a consumers pint of view I can see why you would not want the extra expense . But The policies on average are 10 to 15 a month and it lowers your car insurance that much a month with many carriers if you bundle it . What little you are paying for in the event of a loss you would be glad you had the coverage . What a renters policy is paying for is many things from Liability if someone get hurt at your apartment to if you had a fire and had to stay in another place till you could move back in it would cover your living expense . It also covers to replace your thing like clothes and furniture and much more . Many home owners that are renting out the home with some carriers they require that if you are renting the home that they have to have the renters get renters insurance . There are more benefits to having it then not .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Which Home Insurance Is Best In New Jersey ?
This question could be answered in a variety of ways . But the best insurance would be a program that you and your independent agent customized to your needs . Ideally , in my honest opinion you would want a mutual company as your carrier , as mutual insurer has no stockholders , the policyholder is actually the owner . So a mutual company puts its policyholders and reputation ahead of profits . If you can choose one with a good AM Best rating .
The answer will depend on your individual and family circumstances , objectives and resources . If you are a Breadwinner , or a stay at home parent in New Jersey chances are your significant other will be greatly impacted financially due to an untimely death . Some life insurance protection is better than none especially if you have dependents , or loved ones who are relying on your future income . Some options for life insurance in New Jersey are Group Life Insurance which may be offered by your employer , or an industry association . This is not to say group life is the best in New Jersey , it is just one of a few options . Other considerations are individual term life insurance , or permanent life insurance like whole life , universal life , variable life and indexed universal life .
There is no one type of life insurance policy , or one particular life insurance company , that is best in New Jersey . Finding your best policy will take into account your health , age , income , the amount of life insurance that you need , and the purpose for your coverage . It may be a good idea to visit with an agency that sells life insurance in New Jersey to find the best policy for you .
The states that require Short Term Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York and Rhode Island . A few states offer disability to low income citizens in others ways . California , New Jersey and Rhode Island offer state Disability Insurance or Temporary State Disability Insurance . Puerto Rico also offers a Public Temporary Disability Insurance plan .
I can sell policies in New Jersey and in New York . There are many companies that offer this coverage . Some plans may be different than others however they do serve their purpose . I work with all major carriers which is best to give you the best coverages at the best rates . It is best to speak with a licensed agent to obtain a specific coverage option . I am licensed and I have many plans from the top carrier for this coverage .
Medicare is operated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- , which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services in cooperation with the Social Security Administration , it does not have a central claim-paying office for incoming claims . Rather , large insurance companies , chosen within each state , actually administer the claim payment process . So , from state to state , claim submissions are submitted to different entities . For example , claimants living in New Jersey submit claims to the New Jersey Medicare Claim Office .
To get Life Insurance online in New Jersey , go to a website that offers life insurance in your state . You can input your date of birth in an `` instant '' quote engine to see if a quote comes up for New Jersey , look for a site that offers life insurance in all 50 states , or put your zip code where requested . Once you get the quote . the online agency will guide you through the rest of the process . It is different for different types of policies and different companies . But in the end you have a policy just as if you had walked into a life insurance office , and you will not have had to drive anywhere or have someone in your home to purchase it .
To apply for Medicare Part D in New Jersey , a good website to go to is : WEBSITELINK . There you will find some Medicare Part D plans to enroll in and how to enroll in Medicare Part D plans in New Jersey . They also provide a phone number where you can contact them to enroll in Medicare Part D.
Buying life insurance online in New Jersey simply involves finding an online insurance agency that does business in the state of New Jersey . You can find such resources by searching on line for agencies or agents who do business in New Jersey . You will find several places from which you can purchase life insurance online .
Oxford Health , which is now owned by UnitedHealthcare , offers individual insurance coverage in the states of New York and New Jersey . You can apply for coverage by contacting Oxford directly , or be contacting an independent agent that represents the company . I always suggest working with an independent agent , as they have your best interests at hurt , not that of some insurance company that may be their employer .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
The cost of health insurance can be very affordable or incredibly expensive , depending upon may factors . If you are healthy , young , single , do n't smoke , and live in Ohio , you rate will be very cheap . If you are diabetic , a smoker , obese and live in New Jersey , your health insurance costs more than your home . Your best option is to talk to an experienced broker so you can get a free comparison of the most affordable medical plans in your area .
The states that offer Short Term Disability benefits are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . California offers Short Term Disability that can last up to one year . New York requires most employers to offer Short Term Disability coverage . New Jersey , Rhode Island and Hawaii offer Temporary Disability -LRB- TD -RRB- benefits .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
The states of California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island require disability insurance to be provided to state residents for income provision due to non-work related disabilities . Puerto Rico also has a disability insurance requirement .
Oxford Health Insurance is a large reputable insurer and is part of UnitedHealthcare . It offers coverage primarily in New York , New Jersey and Connecticut . Their rats are typically very competitive and they have a wide range of products for individuals and families . A licensed broker can review and shop their plans for you .
State disability insurance is a government mandated program that many people mistakenly believe they have , but do n't . Only five states require private workers to participate in a short term disability program : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . Forty five states do not have mandated state short term disability . Social Security Disability Insurance is managed at the state level , but is a federally funded program . Temporary disabilities are not covered .
The states that have laws mandating Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island , as well as Puerto Rico . Of these , only California offers a policy that is purchased through the state , and only California uses the exact words , `` State Disability Insurance '' in reference to their state 's program . However , at least short term disability coverage is offered to employees in all these states .
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
end question
start question
health-insurance
I Ca n't Afford Health Insurance What Are My Options ?
Healthcare reform has expanded the Medicaid program to include individuals with gross incomes of under 138 % of the federal poverty line , it has also establish federal subsidies , and cost sharing reductions for individuals with gross incomes of up to 400 % of the federal poverty line . When submitting ones information to the newly opened healthcare exchanges it will be automatically cross referenced to verify what public programs the individual qualifies for .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
What does life insurance provide ? For me , piece of mind and control . The piece of mind comes from the fact that I have thought about my family and had taken steps to provide for them if for any reason I pass away . The control part comes from the type of life insurance I chose to own . I own whole life . The insurance company ca n't raise the premium on me , ca n't do anything to the policy without my consent and the policy ca n't go backwards in cash values . That 's what life insurance provides me . It may be something entirely different for someone else .
How much does life insurance cost for a 24 year old ? Well with all types of insurance , provided you are a healthy individual , the price is pretty low . While Term is cheap at this age , so is permanent coverage and a young person should consider the real advantage of locking in their coverage while it is low cost and has the most time to work in their favor . I am so glad as a 53 year old who at 24 was a very atheletic , fit individual who contracted diabetes at 40 and had a bout with A FIB -LRB- heart problem -RRB- at 53 that I locked up my life insurance in my 20 's , when my good health allowed me to purchase it for cheap money . My rates are locked in , I own the policy , they ca n't take it away , they ca n't make me requalify , the policy does n't `` end '' before I do . This is n't even taking intoaccount all the other benefits a permanent policy provides , but the factit 's `` mine '' I `` own '' it , I do n't rent it .
All insurance auto policies are the same they all have liability which is damage to other . Then you have optional coverage of un insured and under insured and medical pay then of course the option of `` Full '' coverage which really is not the best choice of words for coverage but that is coverage that repairs your auto in the even of a loss minus the deductible . The best coverage would be to have higher limits and full coverage . How ever you budget needs to thought about also . If you are purchasing all the coverage and ca n't afford the higher deductible then full coverage may not be the best option for you . Before you ever purchase a car or insurance shop around call a local agent and discuss what options you have . Many agencies demand that you have certain limits which is recommended to have the higher limits but it is pointless if you ca n't afford the higher limits because if it means eating or insurance well you going to choose food . Talk to an agent who will listen to your concerns and find you the most affordable rate and coverage that your desire . Online quotes can sometime be lower but the service sometimes is not as well as an agent example at our agency you can reach us 24/7 we never want you to ever have to call a 800 number and talk to a stranger .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
That is a great question ! Absolutely you can . The best way is by being a safe driver , and not having claims or dings on your driving record . Then you can see about adding or combining policies - insurance companies love to have all of your business , and some will give great discounts for getting it . The other way , and I am always careful when I suggest this , is to raise your deductible . It wo n't do you any good to save $ 10 a month if you ca n't raise the deductible if you need it . Yes , you will save money , but if you are spending what you 've saved , and ca n't afford to get your car fixed , what did you really manage to do ? Another option is to shop around , and see if there is someone who will beat what you are paying now . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Some things to know about life insurance are : 1 -RRB- Life insurance prices depend on many factors . Even the amount you can get is dependent on your income and assets . It really helps to have a great agent to help you sort out the options . As someone who has sold thousands of policies over the last decade , I do n't know how people wade through all this information without help . Or why they would want to . 2 -RRB- It is important to look at guarantees . In this economy , my advice would be , wherever you can get a guarantee , take it . 3 -RRB- You have to keep an open mind . If you go in thinking you want a certain type of policy at a certain price , you may find that you do n't even qualify for that type of policy . Your beneficiaries may end up with nothing if you do n't keep an open mind . 4 -RRB- Life insurance pays . Life insurance companies are very secure and nearly all life insurance policies pay the death benefit . 5 -RRB- If you ca n't afford it , you wo n't keep it . If you wo n't keep it , your life insurance wo n't help anyone . So buy affordable life insurance that fits your budget .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Your brother can only add you to his health insurance if he claims you as a dependent on his taxes . If he does n't , then he would n't be able to add you to his plan . Under the Affordable Care Act , health insurance plans are guaranteed issue , meaning you ca n't be declined for coverage due to a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue . So if your brother ca n't claim you as a dependent and a spouse does n't have a group plan through the employer , you will need to look at an individual policy - these can be bought on or off the health insurance exchanges .
That is an excellent question ! There are several reasons why buying a whole life policy makes sense . One reason is the security of knowing that no matter what happens during your life , the policy will protect those you love . If your health takes a turn for the worse , your coverage remains . It ca n't be cancelled by the company for any reason but underpayment , in most cases , and you are covered as long as you live . Another advantage is that the premium price is fixed , so the younger the age of person insured , the cheaper the policy . And that price does n't increase . My policies still cost me less than $ 10/month , and I 'm a whole lot older than I was when my Dad bought them for me . Yet another is the fact that the payout is known , guaranteed , and left behind as a tax free , probate safe -LRB- almost always -RRB- benefit for your loved ones . The financial people that advocate `` buying term and banking the savings '' ca n't guarantee the same results unless you are ` lucky ' enough to pass while your term policy is in effect . And since statistically the vast majority of Americans ca n't save money , it truly does make sense to have a ` forced savings ' plan like a whole life policy . Lastly , the policy over time builds cash reserves that can be borrowed from should they be needed . These policy loans are typically low interest and quickly done , with very few steps . I 'd ask that you meet with a good independent agent and discuss with them your exact needs for the policy you are looking for ; they can help you find the policy that will suit you best . Thanks for asking !
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
If your ability to earn a living is important , then you should obtain disability insurance . Many employers provide `` short term '' disability insurance . taxable benefits lasting up to 6 months or a year . Long term disability policies provided by employers are generally hard to collect on , especially for a long term disability . The best individual policies provide the following benefits : 1 . The insurer ca n't increase premiums before age 65 2 . The insurer ca n't decrease benefits 3 . You will be paid if you ca n't do your regular occupation , whether the disability is caused by illness -LRB- 92 % are ! -RRB- or injury , on the job or off 4 . You will receive benefits if you ca n't work full time , or you ca n't do all the facets of your regular job , and suffer an income loss
Let me expound on your question ... Why do n't people get car insurance , or life insurance or long-term-care insurance ? Some people may believe they 're invulnerable , or that they ca n't afford the coverage , or they simply do n't want to think about it . My suggestion to those people is to NOT think about the day that you 're purchasing insurance , but instead think about the day that you NEED the insurance . What will happen if there 's a cancer diagnosis and you have no health insurance ? Or if you pass away leaving your family without the ability to pay the rent or get the kids through college ? Bottom line : In my opinion , there is NO good reason why people do n't buy health insurance .
That is an excellent question ! There are a lot of different thoughts on the answer . I always ask two questions , and one used to drive my uplines crazy , but I always believe client over profit , so I ask . The first is what do you want it to do ? The second is what can you afford to spend ? It is all well and good to want a million bucks worth of insurance , but if you ca n't swing the premium payments , then it is n't realistic.We look at what you can safely afford to spend , and then we get the maximum amount of insurance for that amount . If that amount only covers the funeral expenses , it is still a gift of love to your family . If it gets your family financially set , that 's even better . Please contact an agent that you can trust and have them help you . If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For Diabetic Shoes ?
Yes , Medicare will pay for one pair of diabetic shoes per year , and the inserts to go into them , if prescribed as medically necessary for the prevention or alleviation of diabetic neuropathy , numbness , or sores . You must purchase the shoes through a Medicare qualified podiatrist , orthotist , prosthetist or pedorthist . You can get one pair of depth inlay shoes and three inserts per year . If unable to wear depth inlay shoes due to foot deformity , you can get one pair of custom molded shoes and three inserts per year .
Yes , Medicare will pay for one pair of diabetic shoes per year , and the inserts to go into them , if prescribed as medically necessary for the prevention or alleviation of diabetic neuropathy , numbness , or sores . You must purchase the shoes through a Medicare qualified podiatrist , orthotist , prosthetist or pedorthist . You can get one pair of depth inlay shoes and three inserts per year . If unable to wear depth inlay shoes due to foot deformity , you can get one pair of custom molded shoes and three inserts per year .
Medicare Part B will cover orthotic shoes only if they are part of a medically approvedleg brace . Medicare will also cover soft insole inserts for some patients with diabetes , but not orthotics for those with diabetes . Purchasing orthotic shoes without a leg brace and purchasing orthotic shoe inserts are not covered by Medicare .
No , unfortunately , Medicare will not pay for foot orthotics . The only similar item that Medicare will pay for is soft sole inserts for the shoes of persons with diabetes under the Medicare Therapeutic Shoe Bill . These inserts are not the same thing as orthotics . Also , Medicare will pay for an orthotic if it is part of a shoe that is attached to a leg brace and the whole thing is covered by Medicare .
Medicare Part B covers some diabetic supplies , including blood glucose testing monitors , blood glucose test strips , lancets , lancet devices , and glucose control solutions . People with diabetes may receive shoe inserts to prevent foot sores , and some may even receive therapeutic shoes . Medicare Part D covers syringes and other supplies associated with the administration of insulin .
Yes , Medicare will pay for one pair of depth-inlay diabetic shoes and three pairs of inserts per year for those who need them to prevent foot sores , or prevent exacerbation of foot sores , due to diabetic complications . The therapeutic shoes must be shown to be medically necessary by a qualified doctor .
Diabetes Supplies & Services Supplies : Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- covers some diabetes supplies , including : Blood sugar -LRB- glucose -RRB- test strips Blood sugar testing monitors Insulin Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions Therapeutic shoes or inserts Part B covers some diabetes services , including : Diabetes self-management training Yearly eye exam Foot exam Glaucoma tests Nutrition therapy services -LRB- medical -RRB-
Here is the list that I keep on file for my clients : >> Fast for a minimum of 8 Hours Prior to Exam unless you are diabetic or have another health condition . If you do have a health condition we will discuss specific instructions for your case . >> Insist on Morning appointments only ! Blood pressure and exam results tend to be better in the morning . Many examiners are available on Saturdays as well . >> If you are sick on the day of your exam , cancel . We can always reschedule the exam when you are better . >> Take your medications as you normally would . >> Avoid alcohol for a minimum of 24 hours prior to your exam . Blood pressure , liver enzymes and more may be elevated otherwise . >> If you smoke , do not smoke prior to your exam . Smoking raises blood pressure . For cigar smokers and other tobacco users Some of the companies will give you a non-smoker rate but your urine sample needs to be negative for nicotine . Please call to discuss your case >> Your weight Check your weight in the days leading up to your exam . On the day of your exam , take your shoes off , dont wear belts , empty your pockets , wear light clothing . IMORTANT Make sure you ask the examiner what your weight is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to weigh you again . >> Your height Stand up straight just like Mom told you to . IMPORTANT Ask the examiner what your height is . If you think it is wrong , ask them to check again . >> Avoid Caffeine on Exam day Caffeine elevates your blood pressure . Avoid it for at least a few hours prior to exam . >> Cholesterol TIP Eat plenty of oatmeal and bananas in the week leading up to your exam and lay off the sweets and other cholesterol elevating foods . >> Exercise TIP If you exercise , do NOT exercise on the morning of your exam . Exercise may artificially raise your blood pressure . >> Water Drink lots of water to flush out your system leading up to the exam .
Where can I get the cheapest shoes ? Price is a important factor in any purchase and chances are good that will get what you pay for . In other words look at what you are buying ? Are you just wanting the coverage to be able to use the roads are you expecting that an insurer will step up and defend you , if you cause an accident and will further pay for the damages you cause to other people or their property . Insurance people have an expression . We are not selling shoes . If all you are interested in is price you do n't understand what you are buying > Keep that in mind and also understand that insurer is pricing the product before any information is know about how you drive . It is a complex business and agents can help understand what you are buying and why .
Honey , I hate to tell you this but you created your driving record and your record is going to follow you . Can you straighten up and fly right-sure - you can but it is n't going to happen overnight . Every time you have had a speeding ticketthat stays on your license for three years . I assume you are listed as primary driver and she is listed as secondary . You may wantto limit her driving until she grows up and if she does n't grow up buy her a pair of new shoes and tell her you hope she gets where she needs to go without rubbing blisters on her feet . There are some cost savings by increasing your deductible but it is not enough to pay for her new shoes
Medicare Part B covers one pair of therapeutic shoes or inserts as durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- each calendar year .
That is a great question ! Like all investments , for some the investment is the greatest thing since sliced bread , and for others that same investment is like a tack in your shoe . Life insurance is really not an investment per se , as it is n't going to make you any money ; it will pay to your beneficiary , and you will receive none of it , as you wo n't be here . Many people are led to think of life insurance as an investment in that sense , but it truly is n't . It is an investment in peace of mind , you are assured that your family will be provided for when you pass and your whole life policy pays them . But other than leaving a chunk of tax free money behind , you are n't going to see any returns from your policy . If you have large amounts of money laying around that you can pass on to your loved ones tax free and probate safe , you do n't need life insurance at all . If you do n't , then a whole life policy is a good `` investment '' in the protection of your family , and in your peace of mind . I hope that helps , please feel free to contact me with any questions that you may have , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Yes , auto insurance is required by law . Driving is a privilege and not a right and if a driver is too immature to handle an auto he is going to soon buy a new pair of shoes because they will not be able to get insurance much less afford it . Every driver on the road has a responsiblity to the other driver to assuree they follow all driving rules and regulations and their actions does not endanger the other party
Is an Annuity `` Better '' than an IRA ? First let 's establish what an IRA is ? An IRA is NOT an investment , it is a tax favored shoe box , that investments , including an annuity , can be placed in for tax favored status . An annuity already has tax favored status and is not subject to IRS contribution limits as to what ever you put in an IRA would be . So as to `` better '' as usual better becomes the function of what an individual needs . There is no straight forward `` better . ''
At 19 years of age you can legally `` contract '' and obtain an auto insurance policy . Then the questions concerning past driving record is either going to help keep your rates down or it is going drive your rates up . Then the questions about what kind of car do you have ? Is it a 4 cylinder that takes 180 seconds zero to 60 or it one of these hot rods that will blow the sides off your competitor if they get too close ? If you have been stopped for DUI or drugs and that is on your driving record it is going to be cheaper for you to buy a new pair of shoes
That 's a great question ! Lol , the smarter ones will want to know ! They are also protected when you have insurance , and left with increased risk when you do n't . Put yourself in the landlords shoes - if a tenant is willing to try to get coverage only long enough to get the apartment and then drop it , are they really a tenant that the landlord wants ? Probably not . A landlord that wants to know is conscious of everyone 's safety , and that 's ultimately a good thing . Thank you for asking !
If you make one life insurance payment , then die suddenly , your beneficiary will receive the entire face amount of your policy . If your policy was graded -LRB- as can happen if you purchase a policy while very ill -RRB- and you died suddenly , your beneficiary will still receive all you paid in , plus some extra . If you survive the graded period , or die accidentally , they will again , receive the full death benefit . It is impossible for most people to save up hundreds of thousands of dollars at the time they need it most - while income is relatively low , there are small children to raise , and you are getting on your feet . Life insurance is an incredible value and definitely worth it to someone in those shoes .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! You certainly could , but I do not think I would want to be in your shoes should you -LRB- God forbid -RRB- ever have to file a claim . The majority of insurers will differentiate a vehicle used for obvious business purposes -LRB- a vehicle filled with tools , having attached advertising , or damaged during the work activity will generally get them to consider the vehicle as being used commercially in most cases -RRB- versus private usage . That may not keep them from paying the claim , but it may allow them to contest it , or delay payment during an investigation of the claim . You may very well want to look into the alternative of purchasing a commercial coverage policy , especially if you will be transporting things of value in the vehicle that would be costly to replace -LRB- tools , files , computer equipment , etc. -RRB- . Your companies liability part of the policy will protect your family 's assets against a claim than your private insurance would also . I 'd ask you to get a commercial policy , and write it off as an expense . Thank you for asking !
Great question ! Most folks know the importance of homeowners insurance , but few people realize all of the benefits and coverage available with a renter 's insurance policy . Coverage options differ between insurance companies , but here is a quick list of items that are typically covered : 1 . It covers replacing all of your belongings , including furniture , clothes , shoes , tools , laptops , and TVs after a covered loss . -LRB- Many people incorrectly assume that if they are renting , their personal belongings are covered under the property owner 's insurance policy ; in most cases the renter 's belongings are not covered under the owner 's policy . -RRB- 2 . It covers medical costs for guests who may be injured in your home . -LRB- Perhaps the neighbor sprained their ankle falling off of your step ? Wouldnt it be nice to cover their medical expenses as a courtesy , and not have to pay out of your own pocket ? -RRB- 3 . It gives you liability protection for events you may be held liable for on or off the property . -LRB- Maybe the neighbor who sprained their ankle decides to sue you ? -RRB- 4 . It covers additional living expenses , such as a hotel room , and dining out in the event you are temporarily evacuated from your home . -LRB- Perhaps a pipe bursts , and the landlord says you have to stay somewhere else for 10 days while they conduct repairs ? -RRB-
end question
start question
home-insurance
When Is Mortgage Protection Insurance A Good Idea ?
There are two types of insurance that are often called Mortgage insurance . The first is required by the lender if the down payment for a home doesnt meet a certain threshold . This insurance protects the lender against default . This insurance is often required and included in the mortgage payment . The second is a life insurance policy that reflects the balance due on a mortgage . The idea behind this second form is for you to protect your family by making sure that they have a home , free and clear should you have a premature death . This insurance is obtained through an insurance agent and is handled outside of the mortgage .
`` Mortgage Protection Insurance '' is a Life Insurance plan that you can obtain where the face amount of the death benefit covers the full loan balance of your mortgages . The best time to obtain this is of course when you secure your loan . Depending on the amount of down payment you invest at the time of your home purchase , banks may require that you also have coverage to protect THEIR interest . The type of protection you are talking about protects your family 's interest should you die . Remember that any life insurance purchased for whatever reason is a love note to those who mean the most to you .
Great question ! It is generally a good idea to protect your family from any large financial loss , and the covering of your mortgage is certainly one of those . Many lenders will require that you have it when you secure your mortgage loan , to protect themselves , and you in the event of an issue . It is a good idea always to protect your family . If you would like more detailed information , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
While a good idea , it is not required by law to purchase a life insurance policy in order to get a mortgage . I assume what you are referring to is Mortgage Protection Insurance -LRB- MPI -RRB- , which would pay your beneficiary so that they could pay off your mortgage in the event of your death . This is not to be confused with Private Mortgage Insurance -LRB- PMI -RRB- which is required to protect the lender in case of foreclosure , and is a legitimate requirement for borrowers who can not put down over 19 % on a home . The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau announced a crackdown this month -LRB- April , 2013 -RRB- on mortgage insurers who give kickbacks to mortgage lenders in return for business . So do n't let your lender make you purchase mortgage insurance from a certain company in order to get a mortgage . If you do wish to protect your mortgage in the case of your death , buying a simple level Term policy is often the most cost effective solution .
Great question ! It is generally a good idea to protect your family from any large financial loss , and the covering of your mortgage is certainly one of those . Many lenders will require that you have it when you secure your mortgage loan , to protect themselves , and you in the event of an issue . It is a good idea always to protect your family . If you would like more detailed information , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Anytime something major changes in your life it 's a good idea to evaluate the amount of insurance coverage you need . With a mortgage I would recommend a term policy that covers the length of your mortgage . If your mortgage is 20 years purchase a 20 year gauranteed level term , or for a 30 year mortgage purchase a 30 year term . This is the most economical way to protect you and your family if a tragedy occurs . If soemthing happens your spouse has the funds to pay off the mortgage . If not your cost remains level while the mortgage is in force and goes away when the mortgage is paid off . To save money you may want to ask your insurance agent about layering the term policies to cover your mortgage .
There are two types of insurance that are often called Mortgage insurance . The first is required by the lender if the down payment for a home doesnt meet a certain threshold . This insurance protects the lender against default . This insurance is often required and included in the mortgage payment . The second is a life insurance policy that reflects the balance due on a mortgage . The idea behind this second form is for you to protect your family by making sure that they have a home , free and clear should you have a premature death . This insurance is obtained through an insurance agent and is handled outside of the mortgage .
You might need it if required , but its still a good idea to get it even if not required . When would you be required to get condo insurance ? Sometimes the condo association/HOA requires you to get it when buying the condo . If you had the condo for a while , you will find that you might be required to get it now that you are refinancing your loan through a mortgage company since mortgage guidelines have changed -LRB- which I see a lot -RRB- . Its still a good idea to get it because it provides coverage for your personal items and for the internal items of your property that you improve -LRB- known as betterments . -RRB- It basically fills in the holes and supplements the policy the condo association has on the entire building . Talk to your agent because there are a lot of important reasons to have condo insurance , such as for loss assessment -LRB- commonly found with condos and townhomes -RRB- , losses caused by a neighbor that does NOT have insurance , or losses happening because of your own doing . The insurance only costs $ 100 - $ 400 per year depending on what you need . Protect your investment and get the coverage , even if it isnt required .
That is a great question ! If you increased your mortgage , and there is a chance of leaving that debt behind , then it might be a really good idea to add a policy or increase your coverage to hedge against that risk . Knowing that your new mortgage is probably putting a dent into your available funds , I 'd suggest that you look into a term life insurance policy in an amount that would cover the amount of the new mortgage cost . Term policies will be much cheaper than a whole life policy would be , and there is really no reason for the extra expense of the insurance once the mortgage is paid off . A term policy lasts for a specified period of time , and then ends , which makes it perfect for this kind of need . Look for a straight term , or decreasing term policy to cover the mortgage debt . I 'd advise you to find a good independent agent in your area , maybe your homeowners or auto insurance people are a good place to start , if it will earn you discounts on those policies also . Any reputable life insurance agent can hook you up also . If you have any questions on term policies , please feel free to contact me , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thank you for asking !
First you have to understand what Term Life Insurance is . Term Life Insurance is Life Insurance covering you for a specific period of time . The common `` terms '' are 10-15-20-25-30 years . Term Insurance is also the least expensive of all Life Insurance , at least initially . Understanding this , people get Term Life Insurance for several reasons including ; mortgage coverage , other loans , family protection while the kids are home , providing replacement of income if death occurs during working years . The idea is providing protection for a period of time which will replace income or debt if death occurs prematurely . Example , for your mortgage , if you have a 30 year mortgage , with a 30 year term , death occurs before the mortgage is paid off , then the death benefit can be used to pay the outstanding balance . If kids are at home , growing up , you want to make sure they can have all the opportunities available to them even if the `` bread winner '' passes prematurely . All Life Insurance provides financial security when death occurs . If you have any other questions or need a quote , do not hesitate to contact me . Thank you .
You do not need to have life insurance with a mortgage . If you borrow more than a certain amount , you will need to purchase PMI -LRB- private mortgage insurance -RRB- that will repay the lender what is owed them , if you pass away . Life insurance , on the other hand , will pay off your entire mortgage and leave the excess to your beneficiary to pay other bills . If your mortgage interest rate is so low that your beneficiary wants to keep paying the mortgage and invest the life insurance proceeds , they can so that , with regular life insurance . So , while life insurance is not required with a mortgage , it is an excellent idea .
Generally Bank owned life insurance is designed to protect the bank if you take out a loan . I usually recommend buying your own policy . It gives your beneficiary more options . For example , mortgage insurance is usually offered by a bank . It can also be purchased on your own . Both would pay off the mortgage if you die . With the bank owned policy , that is the only choice . What if your spouse does n't want or need to pay off the mortgage however . This is not always the best option . If you own the policy , your wife or beneficiary may choose to invest the life insurance funds and use the interest to help make mortgage payments . Or the money would be more advantageous elsewhere . Mortgage life insurance with the bank is tied to that mortgage . What if you move ? Owning your own policy is portable , you can take it with you to your new home . I usually recommend level term to cover a mortgage . That way you have extra protection as your mortgage decreases because the death benefit will stay level . With a banks mortgage life insurance it just pays off the mortgage to the bank on that loan . Yes it works , but you are better off with your own policy .
There are two types of insurance that are known as mortgage insurance . When mortgage companies offer something other than a conventional loan they will often require the borrower to buy mortgage insurance which protects the mortgage company from default . There is also a form of life insurance which is designed to provide a death benefit that equals the balance due on a mortgage . Neither of these are the same as a homeowners policy . The homeowners policy protects the residence and contents against named perils . The homeowners policy also provides protection from personal injury and property damage lawsuits .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
There are a few types of coverage to consider . First of course is a Homeowners ' Insurance Policy . This will be required by your mortgage company and it provides broad loss coverage on your new home and your personal belongings as well as liability protection for you and your family in the event you happen to be legally responsible for someone 's injury or damage to their property . Next , and this may be required depending upon the location of your home , is Flood Insurance . Flood damage is NEVER covered under a homeowners ' policy so if required , it means you are located in a higher risk flood zone . If not required it is still a good idea to consider . Finally , look into Life Insurance to protect your family in the event you die before your mortgage is paid off .
You may have multiple life insurance policies . It might be a great idea for you to have multiple life policies for different reasons . You could use a permanent policy such as Whole Life or Universal Life for final expenses or the cost of your funeral and burial or cremation . You might use the same permanent policies for providing an inheritance to your loved ones or gifting to a favorite charity . A permanent policy provides a tax favorable death benefit and a larger amount than just passing on money . Temporary or Term Insurance can provide more protection for the dollar when the protection is needed for a period of time . You can protect family income or debt payoff in the event of a death . You can protect a family from the burden of a mortgage when somebody dies . You are providing protection in the event a member of the family dies . Your limit of the amount of insurance is determined by each company in a unique way . You and your life insurance agent need to look at your situation and determine the best option for you .
The best renters insruance coverage is the one in force at the time of a loss . Reners insurance has 3 functions , protect your assets , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is hurt on your property . Getting the cheapest insurance is not always a good idea as the lower price tag often sacrifices coverage . It would be catastrophic to have $ 10k to protect yoru personal property if you needed $ 50k , or if you had $ 100k in liability coverage and you were sued for $ 500k . It 's alwasys a good idea to first understand your need before you make a decision .
Long Term Disability Insurance is a good idea if your income is needed to maintain a decent quality of life for yourself or your family . Everyone suffers when there is a disability , and even Disability Insurance does not replace 100 % of the income lost , so there is always going to be some hardship involved with becoming disabled . But if your being off work for more than a few months would cause your home mortgage to go unpaid , or cause your spouse to have to go back to work , or something else that would divert your family from some basic goals , then having Disability Insurance might be a good idea for you .
Homeowners insurance is mandatory because the house is thecollateral on the debt that you owe the lender . If you did n't pay your mortgage then the bank has the right to foreclose on your property and sell it to recoup the money that they lent you . The lender protects their collateral by being listed on your homeowner policy as `` Loss Payee '' . -LRB- The one paid when a loss happens -RRB- . If their collateral -LRB- your home -RRB- burns up in a fire , and then someone stops paying their mortgage , they would have no asset and no mortgage payments coming in . Item of note : If you decide that you do n't want to have homeowners coverage on the home , the lender can add insurance -LRB- that only protects their interest in the home -RRB- and make you , the homeowner/mortgagee , pay for it on top of their mortgage payment . It is one of the many clauses that you initialed when you signed your mortgage agreement .
A mortgage is typically the single largest investment a family will make . Not only is it a large financial commitment but it provides for one of the basic human needs ; housing . As such this investment should be protected for the unexpected . Insurance is a great tool to do that . You can get what is called `` mortgage protection '' which basically can do a couple of things for the insured ; 1 -RRB- You can have it tied directly to the mortgage so that in the event of an untimely death the house is paid off . 2 -RRB- You can have enough coverage to pay off the mortgage in the event of death with the benefits going directly to your beneficiary to use as they see fit . 3 -RRB- You can get enough to allow your beneficiary to continue to make mortgage payments until they decide to either sell the home , refinance the home or make other arrangements . Protecting your investments is always a wise decision .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Loss Of Food ?
It may , yes , but it is important to check with your Insurance Professional and discuss the terms and conditions of your particular policy . In general , if food items are lost from a refrigerator or freezer as a result of a long term power outage AND the cause of that power outage is a covered peril in your policy , then there will be some coverage . I have seen that in most cases , the amount of coverage is limited , usually to about $ 500.00 and of course this is subject to your deductible .
-- > Normal 0 In the spirit of every reasonable insurance question is deserving of an answer , I submit . Tenant Homeowner or Renters policies cover damage to your personal property and food certainly would be considered Personal Property . As long as the power outage was caused by one of the named perils in your policy -LRB- fire , lightning , wind , vehicle damage , etc. -RRB- and it occurred on your premises , you may have a valid claim for food spoiled as a result of a power outage . But if the power outage was caused by something that occurred away from your residence , most Renters policies specifically exclude that type of loss unless the power outage then causes covered damage to your residence . Remember however , most Renters policies have a deductible of $ 250 or more so make sure you take that into consideration . Add to that the effect submitting a small claim , one less than $ 1000 , could have on your future premium or the willingness of your insurance company to renew your coverage . It may be a good idea to pass on submitting this type of claim even though you may have some coverage . In addition , most policies require you to take reasonable steps to preserve your property following a loss . Make sure you have done what you can to prevent your food from spoiling following a power outage . Some policies include a number of additional coverages , often an effort to make one companys policy appear more attractive than another . These additional coverages provide nominal amounts of insurance covering specific loss situations such as key replacement or food spoilage . Here again , you may be tempted to submit a claim because you have coverage but consider the impact a claim might have on future premiums and renewal terms . You may be better served to simply replace the food . When an event like this occurs , try to recall why you purchased insurance in the first place . More than likely , it wasnt to reimburse you if the food in your refrigerator went bad .
When food spoils because of a covered loss , then it will be considered in the claim . If food in your freezer spoils because of a fire in your residence , that loss could become part of the claim . If the food spoilage is the result of power interruption outside your home , that loss would be excluded . If the food spoils because of negligence , that loss would also be excluded .
If the food spoilage is a result of a covered peril then yes the food would be covered in most cases . For example , a major windstorm causes a power outage for an extended period of time . As long as reasonable efforts were made to conserve the food it would most likely be covered subject to your deductible . Since most people carry a $ 500 or $ 1000 deductible it may not be to your advantage to turn in a claim if that is all that is lost . Most people do not have that much spoilable food in their refrigerator and freezer .
It may . If the food spoilage was caused by a covered loss to your home - such as a power failure . Your food loss may be covered up to the dollar amount specified within the policy possibly less your deductible . Please remember every policy is different . Read your policy completely to understand what coverage it provides and what exclusions it may contain .
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
If food is spoiled because power to a residence is lost , the renters policy does not provide coverage . If it is spoiled because of damage to the interior of the residence caused by a covered peril , then the policy will probably provide coverage . If the food is spoiled because it was mishandled or out of date , then of course , there isnt any coverage .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
-- > Normal 0 Mold is a slow growing organism that forms on plants , food and other matter . You will find most property and liability insurance policies include an endorsement specifically limiting coverage for Fungi , Wet or Dry Rot or Bacteria . Mold damage used to be covered by property insurance policies , like homeowners policies , if it resulted from another covered loss . A few years ago , insurers slipped an exclusion into their policies for all types of mold loss but softened the impact by including a nominal amount -LRB- usually $ 10,000 -RRB- of coverage for mold damage to property and $ 50,000 for liability to others . Higher limits are usually available for an additional premium but most insurance buyers are not even aware of this option . Mold damage following a water damage loss or the breakdown of mechanical equipment could result in a serious loss . Increasing the mold coverage limits on homeowners , tenant-homeowners , dwelling and other property insurance policies should certainly be considered . This type of coverage , mold damage resulting from another covered loss , used to be free and was subject only to a policys limit . Now you have to pay for it and specific limits will apply but it remains an important insurance program consideration .
Your homeowner 's policy would cover your `` food '' the same way it would cover your couch or TV . The problem is if you have a standard homeowner 's policy , only damage caused by specific named perils ; Fire , Theft , Wind , etc. would be covered . Coverage on your personal property , furniture , clothing , dishes and yes food , should be the same as the coverage on your home . `` Any direct damage '' should be covered . Now all policies will have deductibles and specific limitations or exclusions butit will make it a lot easier to understand what you are or are not covered for . If your insurer does n't offer this `` Special Coverage '' on personal property or charges you a significant premium for it , you may want to consider another insurer .
It really depends on the type of coverage you have ... most insurance carriers add food spoilage due to a covered loss by endorsement only . Under some comprehensive renter 's coverage , it could be added automatically . Contact your agent to see if the coverage exists . If you ca n't find an answer , send me a copy of your renters policy , and I will investigate ... my email is fwinterle@creativeins.net .
Loss of Use for both Renters and Homeowners Insurance pays for any additional expenses incurred if you are forced to leave your home or apartment while repairs are being made . For example , you have to pay additional housing costs because of staying in a motel , you have to eat out more because you have no place to cook your food , you have to store your salvagable furniture in a storage facility . These type of things would be included under Loss of Use .
Often referred to as COVERAGE D , Loss of Use is coverage on your homeowners insurance that covers the cost of losing the use of your home . For example , a fire in your home has caused significant fire & smoke damage , making the house unlivable until repairs are complete . You would need to temporarily move out - maybe to a Residence Inn or hotel . The cost for food , hotel , etc would be covered under loss of use.Most policies have some limit beside COVERAGE D , butif your policy indicates `` ALS '' , which is Actual Loss Sustained , this is the broadest coverage .
Medicare does not cover assisted living costs in New Mexico , as it does not cover the cost of assisted living in any of the 50 United States . Medicare Part A will continue to cover hospitalization and other expenses that it covered before moving to assisted living , as will Part B , Part D , etc. . But the residential costs , food , custodial care , etc will not be covered by Medicare .
Great question . A typical renters or homeowners policy will cover the cost of a small in home daycare for 40-100 dollars a year , by a simple endorsement -LRB- change to your existing home or renters insurance -RRB- What I mean by small , and each company will have their own rules so always call your insurance provider , is by havingfour or less children under your care that are not related to you . The cost for a larger in home daycare would need to be covered by a commercial insurance agency and would require a lot more information , number of children , hours of operation , food preparation , staff and certification .
Is Renters Insurance worth the cost ? It depends . If you live a hand to mouth existence with absolutely no disposable income , then I cant justify the cost of the insurance if it means you cut back on food . But if you can spare $ 200 a year , I think it would be foolish to pass up the opportunity to create a financial safety net that would help you replace all your clothes , all your electronics , your food , dishes , linens , bedding , etc. with brand new stuff in the event a fire took it all away . And there is more to the policy than just protecting your contents . Bottom line ? If you can buy it , you should buy it . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Great question ! The answer will depend on why the food spoiled . If you were the reason that it spoiled , then no , it wo n't be covered . If you can prove that the food was spoiled as a result of a fire , or some trauma done to the home , then it may be covered . If it is a result of the power being out , then you may or may not be able to get it covered , it will depend upon the specifics of your policy . Thank you for asking !
Damage to your home and personal property that is caused by a sudden and unexpected surge of electrical power that is the result of a lightening strike more than likely would be covered by your Homeowners policy . It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms , conditions and potential limitations of your particular policy in order to best understand it 's provisions . In addition to damage to your home and/or appliances , be sure to ask about loss of food from your freezer and refrigerator if the power loss is extended . Many Homeowners ' policies include some limited coverage for this , usually about $ 500.00 . Naturally any loss settlement would be subject to your policy deductible .
It may , many homeonwers policy 's provide limited food loss coverage and a renter 's policy is very similar to a homeonwners policy . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Take Life Insurance Out On Anyone ?
No , you can not take Life Insurance out on Anyone . There has to be what we call `` insurable interest '' . This means you have something to lose if this person was to pass away . Insurable Interest can be a spouse or child , a business and business partner . A grand parent as well . Even a loan company can have an insurable interest as if you pass before the loan is paid , they can get the remaining balance paid . Talk to an agent or broker about who you are looking at getting coverage on so you can determine if there is an Insurable Interest .
That is a great question ! It is interesting to know that the laws that govern life insurance came about because of the unsavory practice of gambling on when a person would die . You and I might be sitting at the saloon , and take a dislike to a guy at the bar . We go across the street , and buy a policy on his life . We bet the policy on how many days/hours/minutes longer he lives , with the winner taking the death benefit prize ! To protect against that , you must have that person 's permission , understanding of what they are signing , and signature . You must also be able to prove a financial loss , were they to pass . Good thing ! Thanks for asking !
No , you can not take a life insurance policy out on just anyone . When applying for life insurance , the two big conditions that must be met are 1 -RRB- the insured person has to agree to the purchase of a life insurance policy on their life and 2 -RRB- there must be an insurable interest . A carrier will not approve a policy if these two conditions are not met . I would recommend consulting with an experienced broker to determine if the life insurance policy you want to buy is acceptable . Brokers can also shop the case for you to see which carrier will work best for your program . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , very sorry , you can not take life insurance out on anyone . There are several criteria that must be met . The first one is there must be an insurable interest . Meaning a loved one , family member , business partner or key employee . In other words , you would incur a financial loss at the insured 's sudden death . Next you must have that persons knowledge and permission in order to insure them . They must have a legitimate need for life insurance and have reasonably good health to qualify for coverage , because that person has to go through underwriting .
At one time it was a common form of gambling to take out an insurance policy , particularly on a sailor , just before he ships out on a journey . That is not possible any longer ; however , there is a secondary market of life insurance policies where the owner of an insurance policy can sell it to a third party who hasnt an insurable interest . It is usually done to secure cash to pay medical bills of a terminally ill person .
You can take out a life insurance plan on anyone with whom you have an insurable interest . This means that the life of that person represents a financial benefit to you , or on the converse , that the death of that person would cause you a financial loss . There is also a degree to which insurable interest is determined by `` a substantial interest engendered by love and affection if closely related by blood or by law . '' This might allow you take out a small life insurance policy on your grandparents , but unless you invest in the care of your grandparents , there would not be insurable interest to take out a large policy on them .
You can take out life insurance on anyone with whom you have an insurable interest . This can be established simply by being a close family member , in the US . However , financial insurable interest must exist even with these types of relationships , with most life insurance companies . E.g. . An adult child can take out a small policy on an aging parent because of the the emotional loss that would occur upon the death of the parent . But in order to take out a large policy there must usually be financial loss . I.e. . The adult child contributes financially to their parent and are using life insurance to offset that , or their parent contributes financially to them and they would suffer financial loss upon the death of that parent .
No , you can not take life insurance on just anyone you please . There would be a windfall for murders and hitmen from their victims . Typically you would insure yourself against a loss for your loved ones and special interests.There is a gateway that must be met called insurable interest in order to take out life insurance on someone . Insurable interest states that you , the beneficiary , would suffer a financial loss or set back if said person were to die . Insurable interests can include a spouse , child , loved one dependent upon your income . a financial institution leading you money or a business partner or business interest . You can never take out a life insurance policy without the insured 's knowledge . The insured has to sign and go through the underwriting process , not you .
No , not anyone can take a life insurance policy on you . They must have a financial relationship to you , or be a very close relative . E.g. Someone to whom you owe a large amount of money could take out a life insurance policy on you , so that they would get paid if you passed away . However , you would have to agree to the policy , and sign the application , in order for them to take out the policy .
No , people can not put life insurance on anyone . Life insurance can not be used to profit from another 's death . So there must a financial relationship between the Owner/Beneficiary of the policy and the Insured , in which the death of the Insured would cause financial loss to the Owner/Beneficiary . E.g. . A mother could take out a policy on her wayward adult son who owes her money , but that son coulld not take out a policy on his mother to get even more money out of her .
It is usually plausible to take out a life insurance policy on your spouse . However , you can not take out a life insurance policy on your spouse or anyone else without their knowledge and consent . The policy can be paid for by the beneficiary , but the insured has to sign and go through underwriting . The key to purchasing a life insurance policy has to meet the criteria of an `` insurable interest '' . In other words , a person would suffer financially at this person 's death , certainly a spouse would qualify as an `` insurable interest '' .
Another way to think about this question is , `` How much woulda disabling event cost you without coverage ? '' Considering Brandon 's well-thought out response to you , also thinking about the question from the darker side makes many of us uneasy inside though . -LSB- I do n't like to think something like that can happen , but it does . -RSB- From personal experience , I can tell you that disability insurance and critical illness insurance has a very real place in anyone 's planning who has a paycheck and depends on that paycheck for their living . Period . I am now 42 years old and at the age of 27 I delivered a very healthy baby girl - went home from the hospital after 4 days like normaland on the 5th day had a pulmonary embolism that locked up both of my lungs almost to the point of death . So instead of being gone from my job for 8 weeks on maternity leave , I was gone for almost 5 months . Without my DI and CI policies , it would have been a financially crippling event for my family . It was not expected - but it unfortunately happened . Brandon shared some very realistic numbers here for consideration . I applaud anyone looking into these ancillary policies to protect their planning . Sheryl Brown / @AshBrokerage
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
Right , Right , Right , Right . In this case ... take the new plan . If this was outside of work , could you have 2 policies ? Sure can . & I dont mean short term plus ling term . Although my buddy Tim gave some sound advice about that ... There are many times that a person should keep the DI plan they currently own while considering a new plan . I wo n't list out all those reasons . They 're very situation specific . IF ... if you were thinking , `` I 'll have more protection if I own two plans '' , I would suggest researching a Critical Illness -LRB- CI -RRB- plan for its additional benefits . Its not an income/occupation based protection plan . There are no waiting periods , the money does n't trickle in month to month , and you receive upon diagnosis a lump sum benefit . Some carriers have plan from $ 5,000 to $ 500,000 . We often pair a Critical Illness with a Long Term DI plan to meet immediate cash needs & long term income replacement . Just a thought ... reach out through the site -LRB- respecting their rules about posting links to take you off the site -RRB- if anyone reading this wishes to learn more . THANK YOU !! - gravy
Great question ! You bet ! I think it is great that you would help out your mom this way . The law says that you can take out life insurance on anyone that you would suffer a tangible loss from , should they pass . So while you could insure mom , you could not insure that guy down the block that you see once in a while , or the mailman . You and mom should sit down and decide exactly what plans she has , and then find a coverage and price that will take care of her need . Please contact me if you have any further questions , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
No , you can no longer take out an insurance policy on anyone and without their consent . Insurance companies look for an `` insurable interest '' between insured and the policy owner . An employer ca n't take a policy out on an employee without consent of the employee , even if an insurable interest is present .
Can you take out a life insurance policy on your grandmother ? That question , like most on this website , can not be answered with a straight yes or no . If your grandmother lives with you and you share in her income and expenses , you should be able to take out a policy of at least $ 100,000 on your grandmother . If you are buying a policy so that you can pay for her funeral , you should be able to take out at least $ 15,000 on her . If neither of those are the case , you may not be allowed to take out a policy on your grandmother . It depends on the circumstances , the company , and the type of policy you are buying . Insurance fraud often involves people taking out life insurance on older persons who have a short life expectancy , by younger people who have no financial interest in the lives of the Insured . Life insurance companies each strive to prevent that type of fraud in their own way , and thus you will find different regulations involving whether or not a grandchild can take out a policy on a grandparent . Suffice it to say that if the cause is legitimate , it is usually OK to take a life insurance policy out on a grandmother .
Why should anyone buy life insurance on a newborn baby ? That 's probably the 1st question anyone would ask when the subject is brought up . I can think of a couple good reasons right off the top of my head . 1 -RRB- should the baby die the last thing anyone would want would be to have the costs of a funeral added to the burden of grief ! 2 -RRB- Whole life insurance is a really great way to begin a savings fund for the child that will grow tax-free and at a much faster rate than any savings , CD or money market account . And the money can be available for college funding or a first car when the time comes !
Anyone can use an annuity . If you 're asking who is most likely to benefit most from an annuity that answer would be anyone who needs a stable , predictable , and reliable income stream . Another type of person who benefits from owning an annuity is anyone who believes they will live a long time as annuities can provide income that lasts for ones lifetime even if the income stream is more than the initial money in the annuity .
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Life Insurance Should My Husband Have ?
You know , there really is a right way to answer this question . I think the right way is to do whats best for you as the beneficiary . Life insurance is , after all , a care package from the insured to his loved one . It is a way of saying , I love you , and I take care of you now . Im going to make sure that an insurance company takes care of you later . This means that the golden rule is this : the quality of life you have now , is the quality of life you should have if you suffer the tragic loss of your spouse . If you are not making do with less now , you should not have to make do with less later . The money you need to pay your monthly bills now , is the amount of money you should have to pay your monthly bills later . The larger question is : for how long do you need this benefit to last ? For how long do you want to live off the insurance money ? There are a number of factors involved in that decision . First , and most important , is buying yourself the time needed to grieve and move on . Think about it . You have dedicated yourself to a life with someone . Now he is not there . And will not return . How long will it tell you to get back on your own two feet and renew your life ? Two years ? Five years ? Longer ? Then , what about your kids ? Theyve already lost one of their parents . Forever . They will need you more than ever . They will need you to spend as much time with them as possible . Can you afford to do this ? Life insurance can make sure the answer is yes .
Your husband should have enough coverage to provide security for yourself and any other family members . Of course , you must take into account his health at the time you buy coverage , other policies -LRB- and are they term or permanent -RRB- and your budget . It is best to meet with a full-time broker or full-time financial planner to discuss specifics and the direction you should take . Simple mathematical formulas are not the answer .
It all depends on what he wants the insurance for . Husbands tend to have a lot that their income is dependent on -LRB- household , family , college dreams for children , etc -RRB- and as such the loss of his income can have devastating effects on a family . The amount of insurance he should have will depend on how much he currently earns and how much he has the potential to contribute to the continuation of the dreams for his family . I would suggest that both Husband and wife sit down with an Insurance Professional and come to a dollar amount of coverage they feel they would need to adequately fulfill their family wishes .
The amount of life insurance a husband should have depends on the income of the husband , whether there are children , the age of the husband and his family , and whether he is the only breadwinner . If his goal is to put the children through college , pay off a mortgage , and provide enough income that his wife can stay home with the children , it will take a much higher face amount than the husband in his 50 's with a wife working in a high income occupation and no children at home . You might want to look at some life insurance calculators to help you determine your specific recommended amount , or call an agent to discuss this . It does not take long to figure out what face amount is best for each family , and is a decision that will impact your family for the rest of your life .
Michelle in New Jersey , What a sad story ! I 'm sure everyone sympathizes with you as I do , however there are rules that govern pretty much everything as you indicated that you are aware . So the answer to your question : When is a life insurance policy considered `` In Force '' ? is that the policy is in force when all the delivery requirements are met and the first premium is paid . In this case the policy was in force , but then lapsed thus it was no longer in force . Your husband applied for reinstatement , which reinstatement was approved according to your account , however the premium had not yet been paid , nor the approval been given by the insurer when your husband died . Therefore the policy was not in force on your husband 's death and the insurer is not obligated to pay the benefit . Even if your husband had submitted the reinstatement premium with his application for reinstatement , since the company had not approved or accepted the reinstatement before your husband died the policy did not meet the requirements for inforceability . Had he submitted the premium and the company accepted and approved the reinstatement before he died then the policy would have been in force and the company would be obligated to pay the benefit .
This is an extremely sensitive topic . The death of a spouse can be life-shattering . A suicide can make it almost unbearable . Not too long ago a friend and client committed suicide . She had been going through a tough spell emotionally , and then almost out of the blue took her own life . Left behind a loving husband and three young boys . Very , very sad . I expedited the claim , as is my usual practice . This job is usually tough , and the fact that her family and mine are friendly made it really hard . My friend , her surviving husband , was so upset he could n't even complete the claim form . I did it for him . The insurance carrier paid the claim as the policy was over two years old . That is standard practice . Will they never pay before then ? I can say that I know of a case with a very high-profile insured who apparently committed suicide just a year after his policies were issued -LRB- he had several - lots of coverage -RRB- . The carriers , of course , initially refused to pay . The insured 's lawyers eventually convinced them to do so : why would they want the bad publicity of not paying a claim ? Will they always pay after two years ? My own feeling is yes , generally , but suspicious circumstances may interfere . If the carrier has reason to believe that this tragic event had been planned to take place right after the two-year anniversary . . Sometimes life is like a mystery novel .
If you are dependent upon your husbands income or share debt with your husband , he should have life insurance to cover your financial need . There must always be an insurable interest to purchase life insurance on another person . Life insurance always has to be written and underwritten with the insured persons knowledge and permission . I suggest asking friends and family if they know a good independent life insurance broker to professionally shop for your best coverage options . If your husband is not currently insured start today .
When buying life insurance for your husband , first gather his health information : the medications he takes , his height and weight , any weight loss of over 10 pounds in the past year , and a history of health conditions he has had -LRB- including the year he was diagnosed -RRB- . If he has had a bankruptcy , felony , DUI , or other risk factors , try to recall the date it occurred and/or was discharged . Ask your husband whether he objects to taking an exam . Then , using all this information , shop for his best rate . He will need to complete and sign the application as the insured . Either of you can own the policy . The policy owner and person making the payments will also sign the application . If the policy does not need an exam , your husband may need to do a phone interview with a representative for the life insurance company . If it is a medically underwritten policy , it will require an exam to be done in your home or place of your husband 's choice . Once approved , your husband will need to sign some delivery requirements to put the policy into effect . If you are the policy owner , you will need to sign them , as well .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
In order to acquire for insurance coverage on someone else , first you need to have insurable interest . You would have insurable interest in your husband . Next you need to have their permission , so you husband would need to sign the application as the life insured . You could be the beneficiary and own the policy . You would have total control once he gives permission to be the life insured . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me.If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
You can take out a life insurance on your ex-husband as long as your ex-husband agrees to having you take out a life insurance policy on him . He will need to sign the application as the Insured person , even if you are the Owner and Payer of the policy . Also , there must be a financial reason for you to have life insurance on your ex-husband . E.g. . He pays child support or alimony that would be lost if he passed .
Certainly , you may buy life insurance for your husband . If you are depend upon his income and would suffer financially at his death , you should sit down with him to purchase life insurance to protect you . In most cases it is a simple process . An agent would fill out an application to determine how much of a face amount you would need and how much he would qualify for based on his earnings . Next would be the underwriting considerations to determine premiums . Premiums vary by age , build , occupation , life style and health conditions to name a few . It is likely he will need to have a paramed exam to recover some blood and urine samples and depending on age , height , weight , blood pressure , EKG , etc. . This is a no cost service to you the consumer . Once the underwriter evaluates the risk class by these tests , MIB reports , medical records the policy is issued and at that time you make the determination based on coverage and premium to accept or reject the policy . If using a good life insurance broker , you should n't have any surprises during the process .
If you are referring to a room mate situation , then it would be wise for each person to have renter 's insurance . If a husband & wife , then it is not needed on each person . Insurance is based on an insurable interest . For example if I had a room mate , my room mate has no insurable interest in my stuff or my liability . There is one other option , the renter 's policy could be endorsed to insure the room mate as an additional insured . The room mate 's contents would not be covered , but at least the room mate would have liability coverage . -LRB- see some of my other answers regarding renter 's insurance -RRB- .
Yes , a wife can take out life insurance coverage for her husband as there is an insurable interest . However , the wife can not take out life insurance coverage without the husbands knowledge and consent . The husband must sign the application and submit his personal and medical information to the insurance company 's underwriting department .
A joint survivorship life insurance policy is a pretty ingenious creation . The idea is to have two insureds on one policy . Whats so good about that ? From an insurance companys point of view , they dont have to pay the benefit until the second insured dies . This can give them more years to collect and invest premium , than they would have with only one insured . Can you imagine if one of the insureds was much younger than the other say with an older gentleman and his younger new bride ? Decades could pass before a claim will be made . From the insureds point of view , blended underwriting can work very much to their joint advantage . Take the example above . The husband may unfortunately be older , and in ill health . He may be uninsurable , or eligible at a very high rate . However , his younger wife may qualify for the lowest rates available . The premium they would have to pay jointly could be very reasonable . Not only that : the husband may get coverage whereas on his own , that would be impossible . You can see that joint survivorship life insurance can be a very affordable way to cover needs such as estate preservation , and making charitable bequests .
Whether or not you can keep life insurance on your ex husband will be up to you , your ex husband , and the court . The life insurance company does not have a say in whether you keep your policy on your ex husband . If you own the policy , you are the one who makes those decisions .
Yes and No . If you are on a group health plan and you are paying a portion of your health insurance costs on a pre-tax basis under your employer 's Section 125 plan then changes to your coverage status outside of the annual open enrollment period are confined to IRS defined `` change of life status events '' . Examples are marriage , divorce , loss of coverage from a previous job , gaining coverage through a new job , having a child or adopting one . Just because you and the husband had a fight or the family budget has gotten tight does n't qualify . If you are covered through an individual health insurance policy it is easier to drop a dependent from your coverage throughout the year . However , with the new open enrollment requirements of ObamaCare you are running the risk of leaving your husband uninsured and unable to purchase major medical coverage until the next open enrollment period . In addition , you could be creating a tax penalty liability depending upon how long of a period of time you would be leaving your husband uninsured during the year .
Based on my education and experience in the industry up to this point , yes it is possible for a husband and wife to have separate auto insurance . This practice is frowned upon though by the carriers and will typically make the cost of the auto insurance more costly for both the husband and the wife .
Securing coverage on your husband is like securing coverage on anyone else - you must have an insurable interest to buy a policy on another life as well as their consent to take out a life insurance policy on them . From there , there 's different types of programs to consider -LRB- term vs. universal vs. whole life and whether you 're ok with taking an exam or are strictly against it - you 're generally paying much higher rates with non-medical policies and the face amounts under a single policy are going to be limited -RRB- The risk class your husbandqualifiesfor determines the final premiums that you 'll pay -LRB- in addition to his age and if he uses any tobacco products -RRB- - please note , the risk class from company ABC may not be the same risk class he gets from company XYZ . Every company has their own underwriting guidelines and views risk on medical histories differently . I recommend consulting with a knowledgeable , experienced life insurance broker who can shop the case for you and review multiple carriers ' programs as well as complete a life insurance needs analysis -LRB- if you would like to determine how much coverage you need and how long you need it for - you can also look at a combination of benefits -LRB- e.g. some term and some permanent -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you want life insurance on your husband arrange an interview with a trusted insurance agent . If you dont already have such an agent , get recommendations from friends , colleagues and neighbors . Prepare your husband by sharing your concerns with him . Make sure that the agent you meet listens , offers sound advice and communicates well with you and the company . If your husband objects to the purchase of life insurance he made need counselling . It is not normally to tell someone that you love that you want to see them suffer , which is what you will do if he predeceases you .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Soon Does Life Insurance Payout ?
From my experience most life insurance policies pay the proceeds within a couple of days once they are in receipt of a certified copy of the death certificate . There are always exceptions to this rule , especially if circumstances surrounding the death are suspicious or they die within the 2 year contestibility period .
Great question ! Insurance companies are required to make quick payments after the claim is filed . That said , they will need the claim filled out and sent in by you , and the death certificate received also , so it is best to get those in as quickly as possible . If there is a question about the circumstances or cause of death , the company may require more time as the death is investigated . In most cases , you will see the funds from a normal death within a couple of weeks . Thanks for asking !
Life insurance proceeds can vary from insurance company to insurance company , but usually from a few days to a few weeks . The important thing is to fill out the proper paperwork and have a certified copy of the death certificate . Once the claims department of the life insurance company has all the forms and supporting documents the claim should be processed in a timely manner .
Life insurance is designed to help your loved ones should you die too soon . An annuity is designed to help you should you live too long , In exchange for a sum of money the insurance company guarantees payments to you for as long as you live . In its simplest form , that means that if you live one month you get one month payment , if you live forty years you get 480 payments . Since that arrangement isnt best for everyone there are a variety of payouts that can be selected to protect two people or to make sure that everything invested is returned .
The original purpose of Life Insurance - the reason it was created is to transfer the risk of a person dying too soon from that person and their loved ones to the insurance company . Generally if a person dies while still having debt or not having enough money to care for their heirs , that person has `` died too soon '' . In a lot of people 's opinions dying at any time is too soon ! But that 's a philosophical consideration . Over time Permanent Life Insurance has come to play an important part in the financial well-being of insureds while living . Term insurance on the other hand remains solely for the purpose of insuring against a person dying too soon . Peggy listed a number of uses for Permanent Life Insurance , and I would add that the cash value of whole life insurance is a terrific asset for use in personal banking applications . For more information see WEBSITELINK
That is an interesting question ! The best reason is because Social Security and Medicare may not be there for you like it was for your parents . With the workforce dwindling because the baby boomers are entering retirement at the rate of nearly 10k a day , there are less workers to pay taxes into the trust funds that support it . Each of those 10k/day Elder Citizens now stop -LRB- or greatly reduce -RRB- the amount of taxes they pay in , and each becomes available for the benefits . Add onto that the increasing life spans , which means longer payouts , and a smaller pool now has to go a longer way . Then add into that the massive boom in disability payments , for those who would otherwise work , but are physically unable to , -LRB- up 73 % since 2000 , according to the Federal Reserve of San Francisco -RRB- and now that smaller pool is stretched even thinner . The average American on SSI draws approximately $ 1100/month , and nearly 55 % of them are living in poverty as a result of their belief that Social Security would be there to protect them . The Disability trust is expected to go belly up as soon as 2016 ; Social Security by 2024 , and Medicare by 2029 -LRB- Obamacare created extra payments to that trust that extended it by nearly 10 years . -RRB- Even the politicians in office now are not stupid enough to let them disappear altogether , but they 've shown no guilt about letting them shrink to the point that an Elder Citizen lives in poverty . What do you suppose those payments to you will look like when your time comes ? Me ? I 'm not counting on any , and I 'm planning and working the plan like crazy . I suggest you do too , unless you are one of the 1 % who wo n't need to ... Thanks for asking !
How long does a life insurance payout take ? From days to months depending on the situation . I have had million dollar payouts in 4 days before , because we provided everything for the claim to be paid up front . Usually you are required to provided a certified copy of the death certificate and any provisions the policy may have required . The insurance company pay interest on the payout from the date of death to the date of delivery .
Creditors can not go after the life insurance payout to pay the debts of the deceased insured person , as long as the beneficiary or beneficiaries who are receiving the life insurance proceeds are actual people . Life insurance bypasses probate , so the creditor does not have the opportunity to access the life insurance payout . If the beneficiary is the insured person 's estate , the creditors may be able to go after the life insurance death benefit to pay the debts of the insured . If the beneficiary is the one who has the debts , then the creditors can go after the life insurance payout . This is also true if the beneficiary shared a debt with the deceased .
The time it takes to get life insurance is from a few hours , to a few months . If you apply for a No Exam policy with a company that does not order medical records , the processing time is usually a few days to a few weeks . Some are put into effect shortly after applying via phone interview . If you apply for a policy that requires paramed exam and medical records , the amount of time that it takes to go into effect will depend on how soon you take the exam , and how soon your medical records come in . The underwriter usually waits until everything is in before reviewing your case . If at review time , he or she finds that you had seen another doctor , they might order additional records , which causes further delay . It is helpful to list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , or else even collect medical records yourself , in order to get your policy in effect ASAP .
How long a claim takes really depends in most cases how soon or fast the insurance company can get all the information . The sooner all reports , statements and documents are turned in the faster a claim can be handled . Claims adjusters have no desire to keep a claim on their desk and wish to get people whole again as soon as possible .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
In Canada , there are two basic types of immediate -LRB- payout -RRB- annuities , term certain and life annuities . Term certain annuities payout over a specified term and then stop . Life annuities payout over the lifetime of the annuitant -LRB- can be joint life -RRB- . Life annuities can also include a guaranteed payout option . Life annuities are only available from life insurance companies . Term certain annuities are available from available from life insurance companies and other financial institutions including banks and trust companies.There are a number of different options to consider when purchasing an annuity too numerous to cover here . You would be best served by working with an independent insurance broker who can help you find the right plan . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
How much disability insurance do you need ? Well , the answer will vary depending on the individual and what they have asset and investment wise and how willing they are to liquidate those assets . As far as how much or how long or how soon is a function of looking at your situation and finding something that works for you .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
The term `` qualified '' should really be `` tax-qualified '' . A tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy -LRB- TQ -RRB- is one that pays out benefits that are not subject -LRB- in most cases -RRB- to income taxation in the year that they are received by the policy owner . -LRB- See `` NOTE '' , below . -RRB- The benefits paid out froma `` non-qualified '' long-term care policy -LRB- NTQ -RRB- may be subject to income tax in the year that they are received . Policies purchased prior to 1998 should be reviewed by a qualified tax advisor for any questions about taxation of benefits . Legislation in 1996 allowed for federal exemption from benefit payout taxationfor policies purchased after a certain datethat metspecific requirements outlined in that legislation . NOTE : LTC insurance policies that payout their benefit as a cash amount -LRB- indemnity policies -RRB- may exceed the government-allowed limit on how much of that benefit can be considered `` tax-qualified '' . If you have one of those types of policies , consult with the carrier 's policy owner service unit to determine how your benefits might be paid out should you qualify for care . Some carriers will only payout a cash benefit up to the federally-mandated limit to avoid triggering a 1099 being sent to the IRS . But , it 's better to check than be surprised .
That is an excellent question ! I am pleased to hear of your interest , as a Roth IRA is a terrific way to save for retirement . I can not advise you strongly enough to start saving for retirement as soon as possible . Yesterday is not soon enough . Conventional wisdom says to retire at your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times your current salary . Please start one soon , and if possible , contribute as much of the annual $ 5500 that you can -LRB- $ 6500 if you 're 50 + -RRB- . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
The best answer that I can provide : `` As soon as practicable . '' This is the best answer I can provide because each insurance contract details under the common policy conditions when a claim must be reported . Typically , most contracts require that you report it as soon as you possibly can -LRB- i.e. as soon as practicable -RRB- . Moreover , in addition to when you must report the claim you have too look at what other conditions must be met , like preservation of property , filing a police report and cooperating with the insurance company . I hope this helps .
Term life insurance is really only for specific needs because term life is only insurance against a person dying `` too soon '' . -LRB- Of course dying at any time is `` too soon '' in most people 's opinion ! -RRB- The point being that there are debts or spouse and or children that would need to be financially cared for in the case of the demise of the insured . And that after a certain point in time those issues would no longer be relevant . In my opinion Whole Life is a much superior product and has benefits and advantages for the entire life of the insured no matter how well off the family is and if there are no debts ! You should consult with an experienced Insurance Adviser / broker to help you with your specific situation .
Is an annuity guaranteed for life ? Well you may be an annuity payout and the short answer is yes . You can not outlive an immediate annuity that pays you a stream of income for your life . You can even establish guarantee windows that will continue to pay a payout after you 've passed . they are called period certain payouts . But yes , you can not outlive an annuity payout .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is An Annual Premium For Car Insurance ?
An annual premium is the yearly amount the car insurance company charges you to insure you for whatever coverage you have requested through them directly or your local insurance agent . If possible , it is best to pay the amount in one pay as most of the time there is a full pay discount .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
What is `` true term life insurance '' ? Annual increasing premium term insurance is what fits the definition of true term life insurance . Annual increasing term is a one year premium , each year a new premium is created and year after year th cost rises to reflect the true cost of insurance . With AIPT you only pay for the actual premium for that period of time . There is no extra premium applied to be held in reserve to balance the cost . What most people , even the people who blast permanent insurance do n't realize is level term is a form of permanent insurance . Just a different time frame for the product . You overpay early to underpay later . The overpayment is invested early to help with the cost later , just like permanent .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
1 . Is there an annual deductible ? 2 . What is the maximum annual out of pocket costs ? 3 . What does it cost to see a doctor ? 4 . What is the cost of lab work and x-rays ? 5 . What is the cost of outpatient surgery ? 6 . What is the cost of a hospital stay ? 7 . What are the wellness benefits ? 8 . What do prescription drugs cost ? The most important question to ask with respect to buying health insurance now is are my doctors in the network ?
Almost all carriers allow you to pay your auto insurance premiums on a monthly , quarterly , semi-annual , or annual basis . If you pay a full semi-annual term or an annual term in full many carriers will provide you with an extra discount for paying in full . Please contact your local agent to find out what payment options that your carrier has available .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Annual renewable term life insurance is renewable at an ever increasing annual premium . Some guaranteed level term life insurance can renew after the guaranteed period is over at an ever increasing annual premium . Many planners recommend purchasing term life insurance with a conversion clause to extend permanent coverage as another alternative to renewable premiums .
Term insurance can build a `` terminal reserve '' and it is a cash value but it is not available to the policy owner as cash . Return of premium features aside , term insurance does n't otherwise generate `` cash value . '' The reason a `` terminal reserve '' develops is that in early years of the policy life the premium is in excess of the true risk charge and the policy banks the excess premium for later years when the premium collected is less than needed to pay the risk cost . Annual Renewable Term -LRB- ART -RRB- was priced for each year . 20 year level term averages the 20 years of premium charges into an average annual premium -LRB- level premium -RRB- . The averaging of premium is why a terminal reserve develops .
Yes , automobile insurance is typically paid in advance . Normally no less than thirty days at a time . Each carrier sets their own requirements as to the initial payment amount for new coverage . Most carriers allow clients to pay monthly , quarterly , semi-annually , or annually . If you pay your premium in full for semi-annual or annual you may also receive a discount on your rate -LRB- this is solely at the discretion of the carrier -RRB- .
Medicare premium rates come out each fall and take effect in January . Medicare beneficiaries as a group are required to pay one-fourth the cost of running Medicare , and annual premiums are set at a figure calculated to achieve that level of revenue . In other words , Medicare beneficiaries receive a 75 % subsidy for Part B , with every $ 1 in Part B premiums for enrollees matched by $ 3 in general revenues . Although the annual premium rates are n't officially set until they are announced each fall , Medicare administrators track trends and anticipated changes and use them to formulate projections of Medicare premiums for the next several years . According to the most recent report -LRB- WEBSITELINK of the system 's trustees , issued in May 2011 , those projected premiums -LRB- as listed on page 218 -RRB- are : 2014 : $ 115.80 2015 : $ 120.80 2016 : $ 126.00 2017 : $ 132.70 2018 : $ 140.30 2019 : $ 148.40 2020 : $ 158.60 There was a scary email going around last year about Obamacare causing Medicare premiums to skyrocket . I did some research and found the information in that email to be completely untrue . This is how I learned about how Medicare premiums were determined . You can read more about the email and what I uncovered on my blog at : WEBSITELINK
Term life insurance covers you for exactly what it states , a term or specific time for example 15 , 20 or 30 years . During this term , your rates should be guaranteed level , if not find a policy that is . After the term , most policies convert to what is called annual renewable meaning the rates will go up annually but not to exceed a guaranteed amount . So , if your paid to age 80 , you may have an option to continue coverage annually to a later age . Look at the policy for specific details to see if this is the case .
A flexible premium life insurance policy is a cash value policy which allows the policy holder to pay flexible premiums in lieu of one set premium . The policy is made up of annual renewable term insurance bundled with a cash accumulation account usually touting high accumulations of cash many years in the future . This is what entices many to purchase this type of policy but buyer beware ! In this policy the cost of the insurance increases annually and when the cost of the insurance passes the premium that is being paid the cash values begin subsidizing the increased cost of coverage . If premiums are not increased the policy will collapse sometime in the future . To keep this from happening the policy holder must pay a target premium which is usually much higher than the quoted premium when the policy was issued . Again , the policy holder is paying more than he needs to be paying for the coverage . A better alternative to this is purchasing a level term policy and investing the savings outside the policy in an IRA . This is called split-funding and will give the policy holder control of his cash values .
The two types of insurance are set up similarly . In that both can provide Physical Damage coverage for your vehicle including Collision and Comprehensive as well as Liability protection . Most bike policies are set up on an annual basis , whereas car policies may be either annual or semi annual issue . Generally speaking Motorcycle policies are somewhat less expensive than personal auto policies . There may also be some variances in additional or built in coverage , for example , a bike policy may include coverage for your gear .
When term life insurance ends , the premium rises drastically or the policy simply ends . When the premium rises at the end of the term , it is no longer locked in and can raise annually . Rather than wait for the term to end and the premium to jump up , you might want to look into converting your policy to permanent life insurance . Whether you convert your policy to permanent before the term ends , or pay the new annually renewable premium at the end of the term , your premium will be substantially higher . But by converting you can lock in your premium for a longer period of time .
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
I agree with Cathy , but also offer one other major reason rates go up . Insurers are pricing a product before they know their cost . It something like building a spec house for sale at $ 300,000 with out knowing that the purchaser is going to require all hard wood floors , a finished basement and a three car garage . Had you known you would have priced your product at $ 400,000 . This is some of the dilemma of insurers . Thy can look at historical outcomes and yet may not see a trend developing before it happens . The reason most auto insurance is sold in Six month terms in the US , is that it often takes a minimum of one year for the carrier to realize rate level on all customers in a certain state and rate filing . Let me give an example : If company A sees it needs rate increase on its TX auto insurance business and puts that rate into effect after state approval on July 1,2014 it will take a full six months to raise the rate level to the new level for the last customer whose policy incepts on 12/31/2014 . Then it takes the company another 6 months to earn the premium for each of those customers . It has to set aside some money in case you decide to move your business , as well as keep reserves for accidents that have occurred or are known to be likely to occur in the future.So in a full year at 7/1/2015 the company has realized the effects of its rate filing in the state . If it now needs more funds , it will take the same 12 months to fully earn that premium . So in effect you can see that the process of getting an adequate rate for an insurers losses and expected losses is at least a year on six month polices and double that to two years to achieve the rate level on annual policies . That said , recognize that your rates can go up annually in a 12 month policy because of a company 's filings and go up as much as every six months for an insurer who uses 6 moth policies.So , all that said , you do n't control the pricing that is an aggregate need of the insurer but you can better protect yourself by buying a 12 month policy . Lock in a rate level . If you do not change the exposure -LRB- new car or new operators and such -RRB- , you will have locked in rate for one whole year . So my advice is to seek out an insurer that writes annual policies if available .
A conversion credit is a discount on premiums due on a permanent life insurance policy upon conversion . For example , if you have a term life insurance policy that has a $ 500 annual premium and to convert the policy to a permanent policy that has a premium if $ 5,000 per year , you will only owe the insurance company $ 4,500 in the first year you convert providing the insurance company offers a credit equal to the annual term premium . Credits are typically offered only in the year of conversion and generally are the amount of one year 's worth of term insurance premium .
Managingauto insurance premiums can be done by working with your insurance professional . There are two primary elements of a car policy - the Physical Damage part -LRB- Comprehensive and Collision -RRB- and the Liability part . Check the value of your car . NADA or Kelley Blue Book are great sources . If the deductible , and the annual premium that you are paying , when combined , are disproportionally high to the value of your car , perhaps it is time to consider removing at least Collision . Of course , you also have to ask yourself if you have the financial where with all to replace that car if `` totaled '' . Liability protection is there to cover your financial exposure - income , home value , net worth etc. . You can always adjust the coverage to meet your needs , but remember that the situation may call for an increase in coverage rather than a decrease . Regularly review your particular situation with your insurance professional .
end question
start question
life-insurance
At What Age Do Life Insurance Rates Increase ?
The age at which life insurance premiums increase , IF they increase , depends on the policy you have . If you have term life insurance , premiums will go up when the guaranteed period ends . That is usually when the number of years in the term is up -LRB- e.g. if you have 10 year term , premiums go up 10 years from the time you purchased the policy -RRB- . However , some premiums are not guaranteed to stay the same for the full term period . So be sure to ask what the `` guaranteed level '' period is when you buy your term life insurance policy . With Whole Life or Universal Life , you might never have a price increase . Again , it depends on the policy . Some organizations offer policies that can raise rates at any time , as long as you are not singled out for the price increase . Others will raise rates every 5 years , or at certain ages . If you buy a Whole Life or `` no-lapse '' Universal Life policy from an agent , your premium will usually be locked in for your lifetime .
Life insurance is all about statistics . If you search the internet for a chart of life expectancy you will find that there is a slight increase each year until the curve heads uphill quickly as you mature . The rate the company charges reflect that difference . Similar coverage will cost more next year than it does now .
Rates for life insurance increase each year as you grow older . The number of people who die at your age and sex increases with each passing year . Most insurance policies promise level payments for a period of years . Whole life policies guarantee that the premiums wont increase and that the death benefit will remain level . Other forms of permanent insurance project premium deposits that could keep the policy in force throughout the lifetime of the insured , however , the policies themselves do not guarantee the death benefit for life .
That is an excellent question ! With most whole life policies , the payments are generally set , and do not rise . When you are looking to purchase a policy , the cost will increase the older you get - so a policy purchased at the age of 15 will almost always be much less expensive than the same policy purchased at the age of 51 . Term policies will either increase as you enter new age bands -LRB- AARP , AAA , for example , that increase every 5 years -RRB- , or after the guaranteed rate period ends.It will rise once the policy ends , if you choose to renew it . Once you start the yearly renewal process , be aware that the price will get astronomically more expensive each time . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
The easy answer is every age the premiums for life insurance will increase . Life insurance premiums are based on mortality rates and multiple risk factors . Age is the one risk factor that is constant , the older we get , the closer we are to our demise . The lesson is to purchase as much life insurance as young as you can for as long as you can .
At what age does life insurance increase ? Every year . It begins as an easy stroll in your younger years . I mean who ca n't afford a price increase in the cents ? The problem is as you age the stroll becomes a walk up a hill and later on in your late 50s it starts to look like a mountain climb until it hits a point where the price paid for a few years is greater than the benefit received . If you feel you will need coverage for a long while , look at freezing that cost for extended periods of time from 10 to 20 years up to your lifetime . These will cost more than the cost of the moment , but will be cheaper for the long run .
Every year , your cost of insurance or COI goes up . The older you are , the higher your COI goes . Let 's talk guarantees for a minute . You can get a term policy guaranteed up to 30 years if your within issue ages . After that term , your COI is much more let alone any health concerns or issues that arise during those years . You may want to consider looking at a guaranteed permanent life insurance policy , or what I refer to as `` term for life '' which will be more expensive that just a term but less expensive if you wait for that term to mature . I recommend talking to your broker and ask about seeing the costs of insurance for different products . Remember , if you wait until tomorrow , your costs could go up so just be aware of what the cost is for waiting .
For the most part , if you wait and buy life insurance next year , the premium you paywill probably be more than if you had bought it today . Age isone factor when buying Life Insurance , so the longer you wait , the more it will cost . Once you have a policy , however , then the premium you pay depends on the type of policy you have . If for example , you buy a `` Level Term '' policy , then the premium will stay the same for the number of years stipulated , usually 10 , 15 , 20 or 30 depending upon the policy type you chose . At the end of the stipulated term , your premium will increase . If on the orher hand , you bought a traditional `` Whole Life '' policy , then more than likely you will not see any premium increase for the life of the policy . Discuss your options with your Insurance Professional to determine the type of policy that best suits your needs AND review that policy regularly to be sure that it continues to do so as your life circumstances change
With term life insurance , rates increase when the term ends . E.g. . If you have a 20 year Term policy that costs $ 50/mo , the rate could increase to over $ 500/mo at the end of the 20 years . Your choices at that time are to buy a new policy -LRB- if you can qualify for one -RRB- or go without life insurance . If your policy has a conversion feature , you could convert your policy to permanent before the term ends . With permanent life insurance , it is possible that the premiums will never increase . It depends on whether you buy whole life , universal life , or a variation of either . If you already own a policy , you can consult your policy and look at the guaranteed premium to see if your policy premiums will increase in the future .
When shopping for Medicare Supplement do not just go by rates . Many agents will tell you that all plans are the same and the only difference is rates , and that is true . However , I have seen many companies go in to an area with rates that are low , only to raise the rates by 30 % or more the following year . Unless you like changing plans every year and you know your health will always be good , this is not necessarily the best way to go . Look for a company that is competitive , but that has a good history of rate increases , generally less than 10 % . Every agent is getting solicited by companies wanting them to sell their now lowest rate plan . Find a good local agent who has been around for a while . I personally like the AARP Med Sup . It is competitive and has an excellent rate history . It also uses community rating versus attained age rating . With attained age , which most companies use , you pay a low rate at first but every year you can count on a rate increase just because you got older , in addition to the rate increase the company has . With community rating , the rates are equaled over the ages so that you pay a little more at 65 for example but when you are 85 your rates will be lower than if you went with an attained age company . Also look for an agent that also does Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug plans . He will be able to help you decide which would be to your best advantage .
Yes . AARP offers at least two different types of life insurance . One type they have is a term life insurance policy that they sell to people age 50 or older . The rates increase every 5-years on that one . When you have a birthday that ends with a 0 or a 5 you will have a rate increase . -LRB- age 55 , 60 , 65 , etc. -RRB- if you live to your 80th birthday your AARP term policy terminates . You can then buy their other policy but the rates are much higher and are still not guaranteed against future increases . Another type policy AARP has sold for many years . It is a universal life policy where the rates are not scheduled to increase but it still has no guarantee against rate increases . They have sold this for many years . More recently they have introduced a whole life policy that does offer a guarantee against rate increases . It may not be available in all states yet . AARP is not actually an insurance company . They just market the policies for New York Life .
AARP partnered with United Healthcare -LRB- UHC -RRB- to use their name with the Medigap plans issued through UHC - the plans are titled `` AARP Medigap Plans insured through through United Healthcare '' Please note , while all Medigap plans feature standardized benefits , there are ways the carriers differentiate themselves . The big one is price . Another item to consider when comparing options is the rating method the carrier uses . UHC uses the community rating method whereas the majority of Medigap insurers will use the attained age rating method . The community rating system states that the rates in a given area will not be based on age , rather everyone in that area will pay the same rates . This means that someone who is 85 years old will pay the same rate as someone who is 75 years old . Therefore , your rates can only increase if the carrier increases the rates for everyone . The attained age rating system states that your rates will go up each year as you go older -LRB- in addition to the rate increases on the plans as a whole -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Our services are provided at no cost to you and we can provide quotes from many companies . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Well I have to admit it sure seems like it sometimes but auto insurance does not increase every year . There are many variable factors that come into play into an auto insurance rate . For example , driving record , types of vehicles , marital status , where you live and more . However for the sake of argument lets assume all factors remain stagnant and the rate still increases . The insurance industry flows through what we call hard and soft markets . A soft market is when insurance carriers are showing a profit , loss ratios are good and investments are performing . A hard market is when profits are down , loss ratios are high and investments are performing under expectation . It is more of a constant guessing game for the insurance carriers to operate a business and keep their heads above water . If losses continue and profits are down an insurance carrier will make a necessary adjustment to remain solvent by increasing rates . Rate changes can be local or regional depending on performance in any given area . If the market turns around and profits increase the carriers will then loosen up into what we call a softer marketopeningthe doors to more potential clients by lowering the rates again . Cycles usually run for several years before they shift one way or the other simply due to the time it takes to gather loss information and process it . I will give you an example of some recent trends . During the dot com era insurance companies were performing very well and rates were down . The market crashed and rates began increasing due to poor market performance and increased losses . Carriers got a handle on the situation and things seemed to be going well for the next couple of years and rates actually dipped a little , but now it seems we are back at an upswing . If someone was paying $ 500.00 for a 6 month policy that dropped to $ 450.00 for a year they were happy . But then a year later went to $ 475.00 from the consumers point of view this is a rate increase forgetting just two years back they may have been paying $ 500.00 . Again sometimes this type of movement is difficult to see since variables come into play such as moving to a new location , adding or changing cars , adding drivers and so on . I hope that helped at least explain alittlebit on how the insurance industry operates .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Many time the answer is yes . But the rates increase rarely that much compared to what it would of cost your to fix what was damaged from the claim . There are many factors to rate increases sometimes the rate increase is just a rate revision and has nothing to do with your claim I recommend you talk to your agent and they should be able to tell you what the rate increase was from
Great question ! Unfortunately , that is a tough question to answer without a little more information from you . There are many reasons why your rates may increase within the state mandated rate limits . Some things that can raise your rates are a result of how you drive . A claim filed for an ` at fault ' accident can raise your rate , as can a poor driving record , or speeding tickets , in some cases . -LRB- You are a bigger risk for a payout , so you pay more , just as someone who smokes pays more for life insurance - smoking has been proven to increase your health risks , and bad driving habits increase your risk for an accident . -RRB- Some things are not in your control - rates can increase if the vehicle theft rate in your area increases , if the company has had to pay out significant claims , and their profits are down , or you move into a different age category in some cases . Some companies will even look at your creditworthiness as a basis for your rates . The purpose of insurance is n't to provide you with a steady rate as much as it is to help you in the event that you are in a position where the cost to repair or replace a car is more than you can afford . That said , there are some companies that will offer `` first accident forgiveness '' types of policies , and are a bit more lenient in their rate changes . I 'd tell you that if you are unhappy with your current rate to shop around and see if there is a better company or rate that fits your budget . If you have further questions , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Sorry for the unpleasant answer , but I appreciate you asking !
After January 1 , 2014 individual health and small group -LRB- 2 to 50 employees -RRB- healthinsurance is calculated on a community rated basis . Essentially a rate table is established for each insurance product with a corresponding rate amount for each year of age for a person enrolled . There is a rate for someone at age 25 , and slightly different rate for age 26 and so on for each year of age . For carriers applying the pure age rating approach it is a matter of telling an individual your rate at this age is `` X '' amount of dollars , for someone covering dependents it is a process of adding the rate for the subscriber , their spouse and/or dependent children -LRB- up to a maximum of 3 dependent children -RRB- for their various ages and that it the total rate for the individual plus dependents . Dependent children over age 21 are added to the cost as an adult . This is the individual insurance carriers and most small group carriers are now calculating their rates . As you might guess , for small businesses this can result in employees with the same level of enrollment coverage -LRB- e.g. - Employee Only -RRB- having different rates which is a headache from an accounting and employer contribution calculation perspective . Some small group carriers do the age calculation that I have described earlier , divide the total by the amount of enrollees in each coverage class -LRB- e.g. - Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Family -RRB- and come up with a composite rate that yields a uniform rate for each level of enrollment . How the insurance carrier has filed their products with your state insurance commission will determine which style of rates you see from different insurance carriers . However , the underlying rate methodology is the same .
Prior to 2014 it was reasonable to anticipate annual increases in group and individual health insurance in the high single digits to low teen 's range . Though , of course , these are just generalized averages and a host of other factors could move rates higher or , in rarer instances , lower . We have already seen the base cost of health insurance increase fairly substantially in 2014 due to the implementation of the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . The effect was especially pronounced in the individual health insurance market of almost every state due to the mandatory addition of new benefits , the move to the community rating approach , the elimination of underwriting and adjusting rates for risk , and making all policies guaranteed to be issued without pre-existing condition limitations or exclusions . In mid-2014 we are just now beginning to receive health insurance companies filings for their proposed 2015 rates . While the rate filings vary from state to state and from insurance carrier to insurance carrier , individual health insurance rate increases in the teens to 25 % or more are being reported in many areas across the nation . In some limited instances though , you are seeing some filings requesting rate reductions but these are pretty rare . Therefore , most people should be prepared to see their rates for individual health insurance increase meaningfully again in 2015 , though this effect may be hidden to some extent for those persons who qualify for premium tax subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Many small business groups are also seeing substantial rate increases in their renewal actions for the 2014-2015 benefit year . Increases of 20 % to 40 % are not uncommon .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is A Roth IRA A Qualified Retirement Plan ?
A Roth IRA is a retirement plan , but is not qualified in the sense that you can not deduct your contributions into the plan . Roth IRAs accumulate tax deferred and distributions are tax free . Roth IRAs may be an option for individuals who are in a low tax bracket and have no employer sponsored retirement plan at work .
Is a Roth IRA a qualified retirement plan ? Well not in the same sense of other qualified plans . With other qualified plans you are participating to get a tax break today , knowing that tomorrow you will pay taxes on income you take from those plans . A Roth on the other hand works in the opposite direction . You pay your taxes now and get the tax break later .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
There are several rules that determine your eligibility to open a Roth IRA . 1 -RRB- You must first have an income . Did you have earned income in the current tax year ? 2 -RRB- If you earned income , did your income exceed the limits set by the federal government ? This income limit changes every year and is depends on your marital status and tax filing status to determine the maximum income . You qualify for a Roth IRA based upon your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You can not contribute more into a Roth IRA than you earned in income . For example , if you earned $ 5,000 for 2014 , that is your maximum contribution . 4 -RRB- The contribution limit in 2014 was $ 5,500 maximum . 5 -RRB- There is no maximum age where you are limited or prohibited from making a contribution to a Roth IRA . 6 -RRB- You are not required to take a mandatory distribution at age 70.5 like qualified IRA 's . 7 -RRB- You can contribute to a Roth IRA even if you participate in a retirement plan at work . Depending on circumstances there may be other rules but this gives you a few ideas .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
There are ways to save your entire income for retirement if you desire . There are tax qualified plans that defer the taxation on a retirement program and they have annual contribution limits . If you are choosing to save for retirement using 401 -LRB- k -RRB- elective deferral , if you are eligible for a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- or a 457 Deferred Compensation plan , you could reduce your taxable income by up to $ 18,000 in 2015 . If you are over age 50 you can increase those limits by $ 6,000 . You can make contributions to a simple IRA and reduce your taxable income by $ 12,500 and add on an additional $ 6,000 if you are over age 50 . You can establish a defined benefit pension plan and reduce your income by $ 210,000 in 2015 . If you use a defined contribution plan you can reduce your taxable income by up to $ 53,000 . There are a variety of other limits depending upon whether you have highly compensated employees or key employees . The other most important limitation is on the ability of a person to participate in a Roth IRA . The maximum income you can have for a single tax payer is $ 131,000 to participate in a Roth IRA . If you are married the maximum income limit is $ 193,000 . Notice I didnt say anything about reducing taxable income . The Roth IRA is funded with after-tax income ; however , qualified withdrawals can be received income tax free .
A Roth IRA is not related to etrade in any direct way unless you simply have your Roth IRA as part of your etrade account . Let 's look at the basic definitions . A Roth IRA is an Individual Retirement Arrangement -LRB- see IRS Publication 590 -RRB- that is generally not taxed if you meet certain conditions . Your Roth IRA can contain a wide variety of financial products including stocks , bonds , mutual funds , CDs , annuities and much more . Etrade is generally considered an online discount stock brokerage service for self-directed investors . You can open a Roth IRA at thousands of institutions . One of those financial institutions is etrade . Whether that would be `` good '' is largely dependent on you and your choices of how you invest your Roth IRA funds .
You should purchase a Roth IRA if you suspect that the rate of tax on your income might be higher when you retire than it is now . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you want to have tax free income when you meet qualifying events . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you want to avoid mandatory distributions and having your distribution taxed as ordinary income . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you are young or old or want to have flexibility when you retire .
A Qualified Retirement Plan simply means it is a `` qualified '' account as defined by the Internal Revenue Service . A qualified account simply means there are limitations to the contributions and rules to when you can take the monies out without getting a penalty . A Qualified Retirement Plan can be an IRA , Individual Retirement Account or a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- offered through your employer . A Roth IRA is a Qualified Retirement Plan . There are other qualified plans out there as well however the plans I have mentioned are the most popular . Seek your broker/adviser for more information and to talk about which plan you should focus on or have available to you .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Drugs Do Health Insurance Companies Test For ?
I am presuming that you are asking about tests for illegal drug consumption and not just prescription medications in general . As far as health insurance goes this is a non-issue . An applicant for health insurance is not subjected to any physical exams or blood or urine tests as a condition for being offered health insurance coverage . While in the past there may have been questions regarding illegal drug usage on a health insurance application that if answered truthfully by a drug user could have resulted in their being declined for coverage in the individual health insurance market we have moved past that now . As the Affordable Care Act prohibits medical underwriting and requires policies to be guaranteed to be issued regardless of pre-existing conditions there are no such questions to be answered now . Ironically , in the individual health insurance marketplace the only drug that you can be asked about and perhaps penalized for in the form of higher premiums is for tobacco use . No questions are asked about marijuana , cocaine or other drugs . This is different from applying for life insurance where in many cases a physical exam that may include drawing blood and/or taking a urine sample are part of the underwriting process . With the expanded number of states that have approved marijuana for medical usage and the outright legalization that Colorado and Washington are now experimenting with the life insurance industry is having to adjust to this changing legal environment in their underwriting practices . Different life insurance carriers are addressing the marijuana usage issue in different ways so there is no universal standard being applied to this issue and it is an area where a great deal of evolution is currently underway and probably will be for years to come .
Under the affordable care act , health plans are , in short , guaranteed issue -LRB- when you apply during the annual open enrollment period or if you apply under a qualifying special enrollment period -RRB- . You can not be denied coverage for any pre-existing conditions or other health-related issues and you do not have to take an exam to secure coverage . So to answer your questions ... none . Health insurance companies can not test you for drugs to secure a policy . If you 're applying for another type of coverage such as life insurance or disability insurance , you would have to take a medical exam . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
Yes , any life insurance company that requires a blood test , urine test , or oral swab in order to get a life insurance policy will test for the presence of illegal drugs and cotinine -LRB- an indicator of cigarette use -RRB- . This is called a medically underwritten policy . If using a No Exam policy , they do not require an exam and do not test for drugs , although they will usually ask about drug use on the application .
Life Insurance companies must do a blood test for any amount over around $ 25,000 , although some groups allow up to $ 150,000 . The tests are to detect both legal and illegal drugs . If you are taking medications and do not disclose that , they will be found . This helps the carrier determine what your general state of health is . So assume that whatever the drug is you may be taking , it will be detected by the test . Even a week after you have taken that drug . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Some life insurance companies have been increasing their drug screening to the Drug 5 Panel/Drug 8 Panel in response to the increasing use of illegal drugs . The 5 panel drug test detects cocaine , PCP , marijuana , opiates , and meth/amphetamines . They also test for nicotine/cotinine and alcohol . No Exam policies do not conduct blood or urine tests .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
I am presuming that you are asking about tests for illegal drug consumption and not just prescription medications in general . As far as health insurance goes this is a non-issue . An applicant for health insurance is not subjected to any physical exams or blood or urine tests as a condition for being offered health insurance coverage . While in the past there may have been questions regarding illegal drug usage on a health insurance application that if answered truthfully by a drug user could have resulted in their being declined for coverage in the individual health insurance market we have moved past that now . As the Affordable Care Act prohibits medical underwriting and requires policies to be guaranteed to be issued regardless of pre-existing conditions there are no such questions to be answered now . Ironically , in the individual health insurance marketplace the only drug that you can be asked about and perhaps penalized for in the form of higher premiums is for tobacco use . No questions are asked about marijuana , cocaine or other drugs . This is different from applying for life insurance where in many cases a physical exam that may include drawing blood and/or taking a urine sample are part of the underwriting process . With the expanded number of states that have approved marijuana for medical usage and the outright legalization that Colorado and Washington are now experimenting with the life insurance industry is having to adjust to this changing legal environment in their underwriting practices . Different life insurance carriers are addressing the marijuana usage issue in different ways so there is no universal standard being applied to this issue and it is an area where a great deal of evolution is currently underway and probably will be for years to come .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
Guardian life will test for Nicotine and Cocaine . These are the two most common substance tests that almost all insurers test for when they perform medical underwriting . Besides these two substances , most carriers -LRB- Guardian included -RRB- , do not test for other substances , i.e. drugs . If there are other drugs that you currently use and you do not disclose , you do run the risk of creating a contested life insurance policy if you should die within the contestability period .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , all companies when using paramedical exams do some drug testing as part of the chemical analysis in the underwriting process . Some drugs will effect certain levels of function within say kidney function that will show up by pushing the level higher . Alcohol for example , a legal form of a `` drug '' if consumed too close to an exam will raise blood sugars , alter the kidney function numbers and a few other numbers like those involving the liver . That is why it is never a good idea to consume significant amounts of alcohol the night before a blood/urine test . It will skew the results . Then it is up to the individual to get a second test , at their expense to show the first test was off .
A drug test can be your best friend when you apply for life insurance . If you smoke pot on a casual basis , and have been prequalified for non-smoker rates , then a clean drug test on your insurance exam will prove you are true to your word . Let 's suppose you used cocaine in the last year under highly exceptional circumstances , and your broker was able to get you underwriting leniency from a carrier . Their offer would be contingent upon a clean drug test now . If you you still use drugs , then you should consider one of the simplified issue policies referenced above . The only problem is that the total amount of coverage for which you will qualify will be comparatively small . If you need more substantial coverage , then there is a small possibility an excess-market carrier will take you . These underwriting syndicates specialize in extreme risks .
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
Yes , life insurance companies that require a paramed exam will drug test . If you purchase a nonmed policy that does not require an exam , no drug testing will be done . However , they usually ask about drug use on the application . The exception is fully guaranteed issue life insurance ; they do not ask any health or risk questions .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
This is very unusual but not unheard of and technically legal as I understand it . In my nearly 30 years of being associated with employer 's group health plans I have had many clients who require a drug screen as a condition of employment but I have never had one that charged a prospective employee to pay for it . Do they offer to reimburse you if you pass the drug screening ? Really a drug screen should only be the last step before you are hired or you are given a conditional offer of employment based upon passing the drug screen . With today 's technology $ 300 seems an excessive amount to be charged just for a drug screening , is there a credit check and criminal background check also included in this ? Traditionally such practices have been a cost of doing business for the employer -LRB- and these tests can be required of the employer if the have Federal or State contracts they have to comply with as part of their doing business with the government -RRB- and not passed onto a job applicant . Personally , I would look for employment elsewhere before I would pay a prospective employer for the `` privilege '' of getting a job offer . If they will pick your pocket up front like that I can only imagine what a delightful work environment they must provide .
A mouth swab test generally tests for drugs and tobacco . It can also test for other things but this is what the insurance company is usually looking for . Many companies are doing this instead of having a paramedic come out and take blood . It is less expensive and the agent is able to do it when he does the application in many cases .
Not all policies need a blood test for life insurance . There are a number of affordable No Exam life insurance policies for those who do not want to take a blood test . That being said , the blood test helps the life insurance underwriters better see what health risks might be present . These include liver disease , diabetes , and high cholesterol , among others . The blood test also helps verify if the applicant has used tobacco or illegal drugs . When risk is calculated accurately , rates are assessed more fairly , and the security of your life insurance is strengthened .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Car Insurance Cover All Vehicles I Drive ?
There is a misconception out there suggesting that your insurance covers you for any vehicle you drive . In reality the insurance travels with the vehicle . So , if you were to let a friend drive your vehicle and they were in an accident - you and your insurance company will be responsible and it will count against your policy . Depending on the severity of the accident , your insurance company could then go after your friend and their insurance .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
You could technically drive any car at any point in time . Just because you have auto insurance , that does not mean that you are covered when you drive any vehicle . Your liability insurance will follow you if you happen to drive another vehicle on a very occasional basis . Comprehensive and Collision coverages are tied to your vehicle only and will not provide coverage for any other vehicle that you drive . Your auto insurance rates are based on the vehicle that you own .
DO N'T drive a new car home without insurance ! Always make sure you have active insurance before driving your car , especially a new car . If you lease or get a loan on a car the finance department usually will not let your drive off of the lot without proof of insurance . It depends on the state , but to my knowledge most states allow at least two weeks from the purchase of a new car for you to call your agent or carrier and update your vehicle information . During those two weeks the new vehicle -LRB- or newly purchased used vehicle -RRB- is typically considered covered . However , always update your vehicles with your agent or carrier asap !
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
My previous career was for a rental company so I have a great deal of knowledge in this area . When determining purchasing insurance when renting a car it is important to consider these main factors . 1 -RRB- Quality of your own insurance policy If you have state minimum coverage dont except much help from your insurance company if something were to happen . 2 -RRB- Purpose of Rental - Yes , The reason why you are renting the car plays a big factor . Some insurance policies will only cover rental vehicles if it is a replacement rental . So if you are renting for a family vacation there is a possibility that you arent covered . Always check with your insurance company . 3 -RRB- Type of Vehicle Another huge factor , a lot of policies wont cover any vehicles that are built on a pick up truck frame . Most consumers are unaware that some minivans and SUVs are in fact built upon a pickup truck frames . The best way to protect yourself against this is to always rent a vehicle that similar to the car on your policy -LRB- If you have a SUV on your policy , you should be safe to drive a SUV -RRB- 4 -RRB- Does your credit card cover it ? A little known benefit -LRB- that most credit cards have -RRB- is rental coverage ! Some will require you to activate it before renting a vehicle while others will give it you automatically . I would always check with your credit card provider to see which type of coverage you have . They often pay for loss-of-use as well which is an extra bonus that most insurance policies wont cover . 5 -RRB- The Length of the rental - The longer the rental the more expensive the rental insurance becomes . At some point the amount of money you are paying for the extra insurance isnt going to be worth it . That breaking point is up to you to decide . 6 -RRB- If something were to happen right now , what can you afford ? I think this is the most important . The most common rental is a 3 day weekend rental . The typical insurance cost for that that length of time can be $ 60 to $ 200 . However , the cost of damage , loss of use , and deductibles can add up to be $ 2,000 and get as high as the total loss value of the vehicle . If you were to total out a vehicle would your insurance cover it ? Or could you afford a $ 20,000 vehicle that you wont drive ? 7 -RRB- Remember it is not your vehicle ! Very often damage happens to our own vehicle and we dont even notice or care because we consider the damage to be minimal . However this is not the case when renting a vehicle . You do not have control over what damages are fixed and which ones arent . So Keep in mind that a ding to you , could be consider major damage to them . At the end of the day , you have to be honest with yourself and determine if purchasing the extra insurance is worth it or not . Not every situation is a same and multiple factors needs to be taken into account .
This isa broad question that I 'm sure will generate many different answers , but here is mine and I hope it helpsanswer your question . As you know , many drivers are distracted by their cell phone . Texting , internet applications , and email -LRB- unfortunately -RRB- arejust a few things that many drivers do while driving . Until we all are driving autonomous vehicles , this will always be an issue of concern . These distracted drivers are the onesyou need to look out for and try tostay as far away as possible . The cell phonedistractions are the causes ofmany collision claims . With regard to `` other than collision '' claims , such as avoiding hail damage etc. , just be aware of the daily weather conditions and the potential for a hail storm in your area . If you can get your vehicle to an underground garage such as a mall parking lot , or back to your home with a garage you will be able to avoid a costly `` other than collision '' claim.There is a company that is selling hail protector car covers that inflate remotely around your car like an airbag . That would be another option if you are unable to leave work or return to your home where you may have shelter for your automobile . I suggest googling `` hail car protector . `` In a nutshell , just be careful and practice defensive driving . Keep your eyes open and constantly scan your surroundings and please do n't use your cell phone while driving . I hope this answered your question and let me know if I can further assit you in your personal insurance needs .
If a person is not listed on the same policy as you they are not covered by the policy just because they are driving your vehicle . Auto insurance typically follows the driver not the vehicle . This means if someone drives your vehicle and they have their own insurance coverage their insurance carrier would be the first to pay for claims from a covered accident that the driver was involved in . If the person driving the vehicle with your permission does not have insurance coverage then your insurance coverage would pick up in the event of a covered accident .
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
Comprehensive coverage applies to damage to your vehicle for anything other than a collision . Some examples would be hail damage , animal strikes , windshield breakage , or vandalism . Auto insurance is divided into the Liability portion and the damage to your auto portion . Liability is what many states require and what you need to drive another car . Collision and Comprehensive may cover another car only in certain circumstances such as temporarily renting a vehicle . Usually to have Comprehensive coverage you would also have liability coverage as well unless you are storing your vehicl . If you are going to drive the vehicle or any vehicle you need to carry liability .
I caution anybody to not just assume anybody can drive your car . Most polices have permissive use , but keep in mind , the owner of the car and his insurance company are responsible if there is a loss as insurance follows the vehicle . Also your limits may be reduced to state minimums meaning if the accident exceeds the coverage amounts , the owner , although they were not in the accident can be held liable since the owner loaned the car out . Another thing to consider , permissive use in most cases does not apply to household members who do not have their own car and insurance . All household members who have access to the vehicle are required to be listed or excluded . There has been a great abuse of this by people who do not want to list children or relatives to avoid potentially higher premiums which have resulted in severe consequences when a claim arises And yet another thing to consider is there are carriers who do not have permissive use on their policy at all . If the carrier is unaware of the individual who is operating the vehicle there is no coverage on the owners policy . Always talk to your agent about how your particular policy works and the potential ramifications of loaning out your vehicle .
You most certainly can get auto insurance without a car . If you needed toborrow , test drive , rent , or lease a vehicle for whatever reason you would purchase what is called a drive other car policy . It covers you for driving the car that you dont own . This coverage would pay claims first in the event of a claim . The insurance that the owner of the car carries on the car would pay secondary .
For the best rates having a good driving record is a factor . Either being a good student -LRB- 3.0 or better -RRB- or professional degree may help . Multiple polices with the same company and even multiple vehicles for an over all vehicle to vehicle rate . Generally married runs a better rate then single . Also how much you drive and type of vehicle you drive not to mention the coverage 's you chose all have bearing on your rates .
If you do n't own the car then typically you ca n't insure the vehicle , you do n't have an insurable interest . If you are worried about having liability insurance when you drive other peoples vehicles then there is a type of policy you can purchase called a broad form policy . It provides you with liability coverage and does n't cover a specific vehicle . Understand that broad form insurance does not give you the option to purchase physical damage coverage such as comprehensive andcollision . If you were at fault in an accident , repairs to the car would not be covered .
Typically , car insurance covers vehicles . Thus , when you give permission to someone to drive your car , they are covered under your policy . The damages they cause are paid by your insurer . If you drive another car and it is insured -LRB- in most states -RRB- , the owner 's insurance will pay for the damages you cause to the vehicle and otherdamagesas well .
This is a very vague question given that we do not know who you are , so please forgive these general answers . My analysis always starts with two things , what does your driving history look like and what is your net worth ? Driving History : this will reveal number of years driving , accident/violation history and how much you currently drive . This is important because if you are a very safe driver who has been driving for many years I would recommend a higher deductible -LRB- since it has never been used -RRB- . However , if you have a history of accidents then I would recommend a lower deductible since it will be used more often and higher property damage limits -LRB- in case you damage something other than another vehicle -RRB- . Net Worth : if you have a high net worth then I would recommend a larger bodily/physical injury limit . The reason for this is in case you seriously injure someone you will get sued . If you have lower limits then the insurance company is going to cut you a check and walk away . However , if you are insured for lets say $ 1,000,000 bodily/physical injury , then the insurance company will more than likely step in and work on settling the amount . After these factors have been considered I go over additional coverage -LRB- rental cars , rental reimbursement , coverage forms -RRB- and lastly pricing . I hope this helps .
If you purchased another car just call your agent and have the insurance transferred to the new car . Otherwise if you sold your car and are not planning on driving , then cancel the insurance . The insurance company will return any unused premium . Obviously you can not insure a car that you no longer have . If you are planning on driving you need to talk to your agent about getting liability coverage or in many states you will lose your license for driving without insurance , even though you do not own a car . Liability protects you from law suit in the event of an accident and has very little to do with vehicle ownership .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Do You Need Homeowners Insurance In A Condo ?
There is a special form of homeowners insurance for condo owners . Most mortgage companies require that you have a condo form policy to protect their interests in the property . Unlike a standard Homeowners policy , the condo form does not cover exterior walls and the grounds as these are covered by an association policy .
Condo Insurance falls under the `` Homeowners '' Category . You would want a type of policy mostly referred to as an HO6 . It provides protection from the walls in , protection for your contents , and liability coverage . Chances are your mortgage company and even your condo association require this type of policy . Living in this type of community you will want to inquire about your loss assessment coverage , you will definitely want more than the standard coverage , and your condo association may have requirements pertaining to the amount of loss assessment you need on your policy . Contact an independent agent in your state that can advise you further .
Insurance coverage for a condominium unit owner is slightly different than a policy that covers a single family free standing home . As a condo unit owner , your policy will provide coverage for your personal belongings that you brought into your home as well as any appliances purchased or `` improvements '' that you made to your unit . Coverage for the building itself and the common areas owned by the association are provided in a `` Master Contract '' with the Association as Named Insured . Depending on the laws of the state in which you live , your unit owners ' policy should pick up where the master contract ends .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
There isnt such a thing as a condo-renters policy . If you own the condo , then you need the condo form of a homeowners policy . If you are renting a unit regardless of how the title to the unit is held , you need a tenants policy -LRB- commonly called a renters policy . -RRB- The Condo form is for the owner of the unit and has similar coverages to as standard homeowners policy except that there isnt coverage for the building . The building is covered by a condominium master policy . The tenants policy covers the possessions of the renter . That form is the same regardless of whether it is a condo or an apartment .
You might need it if required , but its still a good idea to get it even if not required . When would you be required to get condo insurance ? Sometimes the condo association/HOA requires you to get it when buying the condo . If you had the condo for a while , you will find that you might be required to get it now that you are refinancing your loan through a mortgage company since mortgage guidelines have changed -LRB- which I see a lot -RRB- . Its still a good idea to get it because it provides coverage for your personal items and for the internal items of your property that you improve -LRB- known as betterments . -RRB- It basically fills in the holes and supplements the policy the condo association has on the entire building . Talk to your agent because there are a lot of important reasons to have condo insurance , such as for loss assessment -LRB- commonly found with condos and townhomes -RRB- , losses caused by a neighbor that does NOT have insurance , or losses happening because of your own doing . The insurance only costs $ 100 - $ 400 per year depending on what you need . Protect your investment and get the coverage , even if it isnt required .
More than likely not . I am not sure which type of association you are referring to : condo versus homeowners . If it is a condo association , then part of your association fees will go towards the master policy . The master policy covers the building from the walls out and common areas . It is rare that association fees will go towards an individual unit condo policy -LRB- HO-6 -RRB- . If it is a homeowners association , then the fees go towards the board , common area maintenance and insurance for the common areas . All home owners are required to purchase their own homeowners policy -LRB- HO-3 -RRB- . I hope this helps .
Primary difference between Renters Insurance and Condo Insurance is in the ownership of the property . Both policies cover Personal Property , Loss of Use , Medical Payments to Others , and Personal Liability . And both policies allow for additional riders to be attached for specific items such as high value jewelry , gun collections , artwork , and etc. . Where the Condo Insurance is different is in the amount of insurance that can be added to cover Building Property . When you own a Condo , you own everything from the sheetrock in , and the condominium association manages everything from the sheetrock out . So items such as installed dishwashers , ovens , furnaces , and even toilets and showers fall under property owned by the condo owner . Typically renters do not own any of these items , and there is no need or reason to carry insurance for them . Condo policies may also have broader coverage for Additional Coverage areas , such as for Emergency Repair ; Trees , Shrubs , Plants and Lawns , and Separate Structures coverage.When you own a condo , it is important to know and understand what the General Insurance policy the Association holds covers , and how the common areas are classified . For example , what would happen if the association was forced to submit a large assessment on all of the condo owners ? Does the General Policy for the Association cover these instances ? If not , you 'll want a Condo policy that does have this coverage . As always , it is best to speak with a licensed , professional insurance agent who can help you interpret the policy coverage , identify gaps in coverage , and make sure you have protection for everything you might require .
There is a special form of homeowners insurance for condo owners . Most mortgage companies require that you have a condo form policy to protect their interests in the property . Unlike a standard Homeowners policy , the condo form does not cover exterior walls and the grounds as these are covered by an association policy .
Let me add a couple important points to what has been said . The homeowners policy and therefore the condo policy has important liability coverage . Make sure you have sufficient coverage for liability as your exposure is often greater than someone who insures a single family residence . And lastly you do not find many free standing homes with sprinklers as most of the 126 million homes in the US were built before sprinklers became possible in dwelling construction , but many condos . because of size and structure do have sprinkles and many insurance companies give a discount to those policies . Be sure to mention to your agent that your condo building is sprinklered if in fact it is .
Condo Insurance falls under the `` Homeowners '' Category . You would want a type of policy mostly referred to as an HO6 . It provides protection from the walls in , protection for your contents , and liability coverage . Chances are your mortgage company and even your condo association require this type of policy . Living in this type of community you will want to inquire about your loss assessment coverage , you will definitely want more than the standard coverage , and your condo association may have requirements pertaining to the amount of loss assessment you need on your policy . Contact an independent agent in your state that can advise you further .
No . Homeowners insurance is not covered in your condo association fees . Your condo association fees will likely include coverage for common areas and for insurance to replace damage to your unit , not including upgrades or personal property inside your unit . You will need to secure coverage for additions & betterment -LRB- s -RRB- -LRB- otherwise known as upgrades -RRB- to your unit and for personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- , loss of use coverage and Personal Liability . Be sure to check with your local independent insurance agent and your condo association . Hope this answer helps .
The cost of your condo insurance policy is going to depend on many factors . Some of these factors are the age of the condo building , the amount of coverage that you desire , the deductible level that you take , the total number of units within the building , the condo buildings distance from the nearest responding fire department , the condo buildings distance from the nearest fire hydrant , and many other factors . Contact a local agent to discuss the coverage and pricing available in your area .
A condominium requires a special form of homeowners insurance . The title company will require evidence of insurance from the condominium association and from the individual borrowing money for the condo . The structure is the responsibility of the association and the interior is the responsibility of the condo owner .
Condo Insurance can be tricky since often an HOA is involved . What first needs to be determined is what does the HOA actually cover . Does the HOA cover any part of the building . If so then we as agents determine what is already covered and look to fill the gaps . I can tell you that the HOA does not cover your personal liability , loss of use , guest medical and personal property so these coverage 's are needed at the very least . You will want to consult with a local independent agent to help you determine coverage 's needed for your condo policy .
No , Condo Owner 's Insurance is not included in your fees . Generally -LRB- refer to your master association document -RRB- the Association would insure from the wall studs out -LRB- siding , insulation , roof -RRB- and will carry liability to cover the association . You need to insure from the wall studs in . That includes sheetrock , trim , cabinets , carpet , personal property and your own liability risk . Condo insurance is not very expensive since most claims happen on the outside of the building -LRB- wind and hail -RRB- . A specific area to look at is weather or not your heating and cooling equipment is covered by the assocation , or if you need to insure it .
Am I correct in assuming that your use of ` who ' in your question refers to the insurance carrier ? If you purchased the coverage and did not receive evidence of the coverage , binder , or a policy , contact the source of the insurance -LRB- if you know the agent or broker -RRB- and ask for a policy . The declarations page -LRB- s -RRB- should set forth the name of the insurance carrier , the name of the insured -LRB- s -RRB- , and the particulars of the contract . If you did not purchase the coverage , some entity -LRB- like a lender/mortgage holder , homeowners association , Co-op , or Condo association , etc. with an insurable interest -RRB- may have purchased the policy . You can contact this entity and pose your question . In most states a homeowners policy must be in the name of the owner -LRB- showing insurable interest -RRB- and the home must be occupied by the owner -LRB- eligibility requirement for most homeowners policies . -RRB- More details of your situation are needed to provide a more specific answer .
Great Question . Condo Insurance covers you for liability if some one falls in your condo . Also cover you for fire , theft and water damage . You would alos need to have coverage for the inside of your unit for the wall in case of a fire and your unit was damaged . Good Luck
A renters policy is cheaper for the same amount of coverage on personal property . A homeowners covers not only the personal property but the residence itself . That is why it is more expensive . For your information a Condo policy is a combination of a homeowners and tenants because they are not responsible for the grounds and outer walls of the building .
If you are talking about your monthly Condo Association fee , then no it is not . The fee that ou pay each month includes the Association 's coverage on the complex 's buildings . As a Condo Unit Owner , you should or may be required to obtain a Condominium Unit Owner 's Insurance policy to protect your interest in the property , your personal belongings and liability exposures . This would be paid separately by you to your insurance company .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Can I Enroll In Medigap ?
Most people will enroll in a Medigap -LRB- Medicare supplement -RRB- plan when they first become eligible for Medicare . Most carriers require you to have Medicare Part A and Part B in effect before they will issue a Medigap plan . Even if you buy a Medigap plan that does not require you to have Medicare Part B , your supplement plan will pay AS IF you had Part B.
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . When enrolling under a special enrollment period , the effective date would be the 1st of the following month after you apply . The effective date of coverage when applying during the general enrollment period will be July 1 of the year you apply . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is an `` open enrollment period '' during which you can buy any Medigap insurance policy -LRB- Plan F -RRB- sold in your state beginning the month in which you turn age 65 and you are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this six month open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap insurance offered , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people in good health . If you apply for Medigap coverage after your open enrollment period , there 's no guarantee that an insurance company will sell you a Medigap policy if you dont meet the medical underwriting requirements , unless you 're eligible because you have group health insurance through an employer or union . If this is your situation , the Medigap enrollment period begins when you sign-up for Part B . There are some situations if you are under 65 and are eligible for Medicare because of a disability you could be eligible for Medigap coverage . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and are under 65 , some states require at least one type of Medigap policy to be offered to you .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . Please note , when you enroll in Part B during the general enrollment period , your effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No . Medicare Supplement , also known as Medigap , plans have no enrollment period . However if you are currently enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan , you will have to wait for one of the times you can unenroll before you can enroll in the Medigap plan . There are some times that are better to enroll in a Medigap plan . When you are both 65 and newly enrolled in Medicare part B , you have a period of time when you can pick any plan regardless of your health conditions . In some states , you 're allowed to change plans during the month of your birthday .
You can apply for a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best time to buy a Medigap policy is when you are first eligible , i.e. during your 6-month Medigap open enrollment period , because you can buy any Medigap policy sold in your state , even if you have health problems . This period automatically starts the month you 're 65 and enrolled in Medicare Part B , and once it 's over , you ca n't get it again . Medigap insurance companies are generally allowed to use medical underwriting to decide whether to accept your application and how much to charge you for the Medigap policy . However , if you apply during your Medigap open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap policy the company sells , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people with good health .
You have an initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare -LRB- specifically , when you start Medicare Part B -RRB- . This is a 6-month window from your Medicare Part B effective date where you can buy any Medigap plan from any insurance company with no medical underwriting . Outside of your initial open enrollment period , you can buy a new Medigap plan at any time throughout the year -LRB- which is great for trying to lower your monthly premium - and since Medigap plans are standardized , you can lower your premium without losing benefits -RRB- . Medigap plans are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like MA & Part D plans are . Please note , you may have to answer health questions on the application to qualify for a new Medigap plan . I hope the information is helpful . Please feel free to contact me if you need help getting a Medigap plan set up for your Medicare insurance program or are looking to lower your monthly premium . Thanks very much .
If you are new to Medicare and in your Initial Enrollment Period you are also in your Medigap Open Enrollment Period . This is a one time event that lasts for 6 month . It begins the first day of the month in which you turn 65 or older and are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this time you can purchase any Medigap Plan an insurance company offers in your state without answering any medical questions . Not knowing what your health may be in the future , It 's a great time to get Medigap . The Annual Election Period -LRB- Oct 15 through Dec 7 -RRB- is a time for you to change your Prescription Drug Plan -LRB- Part D -RRB- . You do not have to make any changes to your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans are guaranteed renewable . As long as you make your premium payments , the plan is yours to keep . If you want to apply for a new Medigap plan or replace an existing plan outside of your initial Open Enrollment period , you 'll have to answer health questions . The good news is that insurance companies each have their own set of unique medical questions . I 've seen insulin dependent diabetics get declined with one company but offered a policy with another .
Medicare Beneficiaries who are in their Initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only 6 month period when federal law allows you to buy any Medigap policy sold in your state -RRB- can not be declined a Medigap Policy . However , if you are out of your Initial Open Enrollment Period , you will have to qualify for a Medigap policy based upon the insurance company 's medical underwriting guidelines . There are certain situations that allow Medicare Beneficiaries to obtain Medicare Supplement insurance without worry of being declined . You can not be declined for Medigap insurance if you have a Guaranteed Issue Right . A Guaranteed Issue Right may be obtained if your other health insurance coverage changes . Definitely consult Medicare or an independent agent to find out if you have a Guaranteed Issue Right . If you dont qualify for Guaranteed Issue and youre no longer in your Initial Open Enrollment Period , you 'll have to answer the health questions on the Medigap application . Each insurance company has their own unique set of questions and underwriting guidelines . Your specific health issue may be a concern with ABC insurance company but not with XYZ insurance company . The best way to see if you can get a Medigap Policy is by working with a Medicare Supplement Specialist who can shop the independent market to help you determine if there are companies that meet your unique health situation .
Yes , you can be declined for Medigap insurance , but there 's usually a company that will likely take you unless certain events occur -LRB- e.g. you 're about to go in for major surgery -RRB- When you apply for Medigap coverage outside of your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare -LRB- and do n't have a special enrollment period qualifying event -RRB- , you can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering the health questions on the application -RRB- . Each insurance company has their own health questions so you may be able to qualify for one company and not another if you have certain major medical conditions you 're being treated for/have been treated for in the last few years -LRB- e.g. insulin-dependent diabetic , heart disease , cancer history , etc. -RRB- . This makes when you 're new to Medicare the best time to first buy a Medigap plan . You will have a a 6-month window to buy any Medigap plan and the carrier can not decline you for any medical issues - meaning no medical underwriting during this period . You should work with an independent broker who can review options from many companies and make sure that the Medigap plan you purchase is offering you the benefits at the lowest possible cost . Please remember , Medigap plans are standardized , meaning that regardless of the insurance company you have the coverage through , they will ALL pay the same exact way . The only difference is the price you 're paying . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap insurance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Assuming you are not under 65 and disabled , you can apply any time you are at least 65 years old and enrolled in both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- original Medicare -RRB- . If you are on a Medicare Advantage Plan , you may not purchase a Medicare Supplement unless you switch back to original Medicare . The best time to `` sign up '' for a Medicare Supplement or `` Medigap '' policy is during your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , which lasts for 6 months and begins on the first day of the month your both 65 or older and enrolled in Medicare Part B . During your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , an insurance company can not use medical underwriting and can not rufue to sell you any Medigap policy it offers .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Does Long Term Health Insurance Cost ?
I 'm unsure exactly of whether you are referring to regular health insurance or long-term care insurance . Either way , the cost of coverage under both types of insurance will vary from person to person . For health insurance , your age , where you live , if you use tobacco products , the carrier you purchase through , your plan metal level , and if you qualify for a subsidy to reduce your premium will determine how much a good policy is going to cost . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Tobacco usage can increase your premiums up to 50 % as well . If you 're referring to long-term care coverage , a number of factors can affect the cost of the policy such as your gender , where you live , the monthly benefit of the policy , the policy 's benefit period , any discounts when spouses apply together , etc. . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you determine which plan will work best for your specific needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Technically , no . Medicare was designed to help the elderly pay for acute sickness and accidents from whichone can heal relatively quickly . It does not cover chronic illness or prolonged rehabilitation from an accident . However , Medicare will provide payment of costs for some `` short-term '' recovery for the elderly that are enrolled in Medicare part A & B . There are prequalifications and limitations to what it will pay for , how much it will pay , the type of care it will pay for , and for how long -LRB- maximum of 100 days -RRB- . Payment for long-term care is usually paid out of pocket , or by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . To receive payment for care from the latter , one must be `` impoverished '' as defined by the state that they live in , and they usually must be in a facility -LRB- Medicaid/Medical only pay a few hundred dollars a month of home care -RRB- . The only other solution to the problem of paying for long-term care , either at home or in a facility , is long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- . This sector of the health insurance industry is in a bit of turmoil right now and if you have decided that you want to explore LTCi , make sure that you work with someone that is a specialist in this area . There are an infinite number of designs in coverage which can vary the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- by thousands of dollars a year . Also , be sure that you are working with agents that only work with the best LTCi companies in the industry , those that have strong financials , high ratings , and are committed to the field . The most important thing is to have a plan . Your plan may or may not include LTCi . But , if it does , buy no later than your mid-fifties as the price really starts to climb after that . Dont depend on Medicare for the payment of long-term care costs .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
The best time to buy long-term care insurance is anytime you are medically qualified to do so . The biggest problem people have is that they wait too long to apply , they get a condition or chronic health problem that is uninsurable by any carrier , and they are stuck with an LTC-friendly annuity as their only possible solution to how they might pay for long-term care costs . -LRB- This would be an annuity that does not require underwriting for the LTC benefit of the annuity contract , but allows for liberal access to the account value for payment of LTC costs . -RRB- Buying at a very young age does n't not have much of a financial advantage since premiums do n't really start to climb until about ages 50-60 . After age 65 , one has in reality `` missed the train '' and , assuming medical qualification , will pay a hefty price for a traditionally designed long-term care contract . However , there is another train behind the first one , and that involves designing the contract as a static pool of money with maximum access to it . It costs about half of thetraditionally designed LTCi contract , but it lacks any accommodation for the escalation of care costs over time . Still , it is better than no coverage at all . From an economic perspective , in buying young , one would have to weigh the cost of paying premium over a longer period of time . From an insurability perspective , however , one should remember that Superman -LRB- Christopher Reeve -RRB- did not know he would become a quadriplegic at age 41 . Also , many carriers have a `` preferred '' rate class , which may be a lot easier to get at an early application age . Recent claims history research has shown that a greater percentage of claimants are under age 65 and the number is growing . With some possible tax breaks on the payment of LTCi premiums - and possibly greater tax breaks in the future as Congress weighs the burden the uninsured elderly on Medicaid - one should seriously start planning for long-term care individually , as a couple , and for parents as early as possible . Death will happen . How long it takes to die may be problematic and costly .
Long Term Care and the cost associated with it is rising in the US . According to page 63 in the 2015 Medicare and You Book `` At least 70 % of people over 65 will need long-term care services and support at some point '' . It 's always important to consider factoring in those cost in your retirement planning . Cost vary from state to state , you can find a great resource that outlines these costs at WEBSITELINK No matter how you look at it Long Term Care Insurance is expensive and there is a lot of underwriting that goes with it . A viable option for a lot of families is to consider short term care insurance . Premiums are much lower and the underwriting process is much easier . Many application are approved in under a week . Short Term Care plans can pay for nursing home facility , assisted living facility , home health care , adult day care and hospice care . Feel free to contact us for more information .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Recommended Car Insurance Coverage ?
That is a great question ! Depending upon where you live , your State will have a minimum required amount . In Texas , it is 30/60/25 - $ 30,000 max payout per person for an accident , $ 60,000 total paid per accident , and $ 25,000 max property damage paid . That said , we recommend that you have coverage equal or better than 100/300/100 . We have a very large number of very expensive foreign sports cars in Houston , and $ 25,000 does n't go far in repairing one , if you are unfortunate enough to hit one . I hope that helps ! Thanks for asking !
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
The insurance company you currently have your auto insurance with may extend coverage to a rental car . If so you do have the option of waiving the coverage offered by the rental car agency . I recommend you contact your agent to verify if your coverage applies to a rental car since not all polices will extend to rental cars . Also depending on the state you are in there are advantages of purchasing the rental cars insurance . For example if you have a solo car accident the damage will be picked up by the rental car agency and not your own insurance carrier thereby avoiding any potential points that may apply . But again , I strongly suggest you contact your agent if you are not sure that your current insurance carrier will extend coverage to a rental car .
Very rarely will a reputable car dealership even let you leave the lot with out proof of insurance that is full coverage . Even if you traded in your old car with a new car and the old one had full coverage on it you have limited coverage for the new car with some carriers it will only cover the amount of what the value was for the old car you traded in . I would recommend always prior to even shopping for a car you shop for the insurance rates on the new car and make sure you are properly protected .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
The 1st thing you need to think about is what you can afford for the cost of insurance and also what can you afford to loose id you have inadequate coverage . Each state varies for the amount of liability that you are required to have . In Montana the limits are 25K per person -LRB- medical payment to others -RRB- 50K per accident and 10K for property damage which if you think about it that is not much coverage in the event of a major accident . Then you need to take in the factor of uninsured and underinsured both are fairly inexpensive and well worth the few dollars it is a month here in our state 1 in 3 cars has no insurances your odds of an accident and getting hit by someone with no insurance is high . Laws in most states require you to have the state minimum . I recommend the higher limits then what state requirements are however . You also have a budget in mind It does no good to buy a policy with higher limits if you can not afford the monthly payment . So it really depends on what you can afford to loose and what fits your monthly budget.I recommend talking to a local agent and seeing what they have for rates as a independent agent can compare rates with many carriers and can help you muddle through the confusion .
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
As a rule of thumb I always recommend you have as much coverage on a rental car as you would the cars you own . Typically , this is not an issue because most agents will automatically put you down for `` non-owned/hired '' autos on your personal policy . This is just an endorsement to your policy that will extend your liability and collision coverage to cars you are legally borrowing or renting . Make sure you check your policy for an endorsement like this . Other options : you can get rental insurance through the car rental agency or your credit card sometimes offers coverage for rental cars , just call the company and ask .
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
This is a very vague question given that we do not know who you are , so please forgive these general answers . My analysis always starts with two things , what does your driving history look like and what is your net worth ? Driving History : this will reveal number of years driving , accident/violation history and how much you currently drive . This is important because if you are a very safe driver who has been driving for many years I would recommend a higher deductible -LRB- since it has never been used -RRB- . However , if you have a history of accidents then I would recommend a lower deductible since it will be used more often and higher property damage limits -LRB- in case you damage something other than another vehicle -RRB- . Net Worth : if you have a high net worth then I would recommend a larger bodily/physical injury limit . The reason for this is in case you seriously injure someone you will get sued . If you have lower limits then the insurance company is going to cut you a check and walk away . However , if you are insured for lets say $ 1,000,000 bodily/physical injury , then the insurance company will more than likely step in and work on settling the amount . After these factors have been considered I go over additional coverage -LRB- rental cars , rental reimbursement , coverage forms -RRB- and lastly pricing . I hope this helps .
Market value -LRB- what others would pay for same car -RRB- with plus or minus depending on features , condition of vehcle , age , mileage -LRB- thats a big one -RRB- , type of car , quality of car , car been wrecked or under water ... As much as they cost now I recommend that you always get REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE and you get GAP COVERAGE . ALSO , GET EXTENDED WARRANTY FROM THE DEALER . I have been involved in these issues so many times that I still sit down and cry like a baby . People get it in the back so many times just because they are ignorant of coverages that are available to them ... shame shame agents and shame shame tightwad idiots
The amount can vary by car and company , but there is a gneral rule of thumb that is a pretty good guide . Usualy , a car is `` totalled '' when the insurance claims adjuster appraises the damage and compares the cost to repair with the `` book value '' of the car . There are various sources to determine the value of a car including , but not limited to , Kelly Blue Bookor the NADA guide as examples . Generally , if the cost to repair is about 70 % of the car 's value , it is likely that the adjuster will recommend categorizing the car as a total loss and will offer you a settlement sum that is in the neighborhood of the repair cost .
What you are describing is not term insurance . I usually recommend term insurance to pay off specific items such as mortgages and college education funding for children . I recommend a smaller face amount permanent policy to take care of final expenses and income . Every person 's situation is different . I would recommend you revisit exactly what you want the life insurance to accomplish .
Car insurance is important to have for a number of reasons , the big one being it 's generally required by law ! But if that is n't enough to convince you , here are some other reasons it 's important to have car insurance : 1 -RRB- Car insurance protects YOU . Your bodily injury and property damagelimits determine how much the insurance company will pay if you are sued . So , if you have bodily injury limits of 50/100 , your insurance company will only pay $ 50,000 per person and a total of $ 100,000 per accident . If the amount you are sued for is $ 350,000 , guess who is paying the rest ... 2 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your PASSENGERS . What if you are in an accident , the OTHER driver is at fault , but they do n't have any or enough insurance ? That is when your insurance can help again , IF you have uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage . This coverage is similar to the bodily injury/property damage coverage already discussed , but this coverage is to protect you and your passengers in case you are hit by an uninsured or underinsured motorist . 3 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your CAR -LRB- and your wallet -RRB- . If you have Comprehensive -LRB- or Other than Collision -RRB- and Collision coverage on your car , then your car can be repaired and the repairs will be paid for by the insurance company , minus your deductible . This coverage is generally required ONLY if you have a loan or a lease on the vehicle , but it could be a good idea to sit down with your insurance agent and see if your vehicle should have this coverage .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is A Non Registered Retirement Savings Plan ?
In Canada , if a plan is a Registered Retirement Savings Plan . the the contributions are tax deductible and the plan grow tax deferred . The withdrawals are taxable and must start before the end of the year in which you turn 71 -LRB- based on current legislation -RRB- Other tax advantaged plans can be used to save for retirement and they would be non registered . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are non qualified , non registered retirement savings plans . Currently , one of the most popular plans is a non modified endowment contract featuring current assumption universal life with three crediting methods to choose from : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting using equities and bonds investments .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A Registered Retirement Plan is a plan that as the name suggests is designed for retirement savings . The usual attributes include deductibility of contributions and tax deferred grow while in the plan . Withdrawals from the plan are usually taxable . There are different types of plans available . In Canada for example , Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are available on an individual or group basis . You can make the contributions for you own plan or to a plan for your spouse -LRB- It is an irrevocable gift -RRB- . Registered Pension Plans are also available with the employer making some or all of the contributions . In addition , the Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- does not offer tax deductibility of contributions , however the funds grow tax free and the withdrawals do not attract taxation . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
In Canada , if a plan is a Registered Retirement Savings Plan . the the contributions are tax deductible and the plan grow tax deferred . The withdrawals are taxable and must start before the end of the year in which you turn 71 -LRB- based on current legislation -RRB- Other tax advantaged plans can be used to save for retirement and they would be non registered . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Where the best place to save for your retirement depends on your situation . As a general rule though a plan that has tax deferral is best . That will allow you to receive the full effect of compound interest or growth . In Canada plans like Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are tax deductible and provide tax deferred growth , they are designed specifically for retirement savings . The income is taxable when it is withdrawn . If you have a plan where your employer will contribute and perhaps match your contributions . It might a Registered Pension Plan or towards your RRSP , regardless that is hard to beat . Other option is a Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- where the contributions are not deductible , but have Tax Free growth and the money is not taxed on withdrawal . There is no cookie cutter plan or product that is best . I really depends on your individual objectives . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
I should preface this by saying you should explore alternatives before you do surrender a retirement plan since in addition to lost savings there are tax consequences . In Canada , whether you can cash in you retirement plan depends on what type of plan you have . Individual Registered Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- can be surrendered . Group Pension Plans can not be surrendered while you are part of the plan . When you leave the plan whether you can access funds or are required to transfer to a locked in RRSP depends on a number of factors . It depends . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Retirement plans are governed by legislation and withdrawals where permitted have tax consequences . In Canada , you can withdraw from your Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- . The amount withdrawn is added to your income . There is a withholding tax of 10 % for amounts up to $ 5,000 , 20 % for $ 5001 to $ 15,000 and 30 % over $ 15,000 . Pension plans are more restrictive and you can not withdraw lump sums from the plan while you are with the company . Even when you leave there are restrictions on withdrawal other than as an income or transfer to a `` locked-in '' Registered Retirement Savings Plans . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
In Canada , mutual fund fees on non-registered accounts are not tax deductible . Fees paid to an advisor to manage an non-registered investment account are tax deductible , however . The advisor fees in a mutual fund are imbedded in the fund . Ask whether you advisor can arrange to change to a class of funds that charges you the advisor trailer fee directly . This way you can deduct it . If you have further questions , or if you feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . Mutual funds are often used as part of a retirement plan . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
In Canada a Registered Retirement Savings Plan , RRSP is a tax sheltered savings plan that is not taxed while funds are inside the plan only when they are withdrawn . You are permitted to deduct your contributions to an RRSP up to a yearly limit -LRB- $ 24,270 in 2014 -RRB- . You can make contributions to your own plan , your spouse 's and that of your common law partner.Your individual contribution limit is included on your Notice of income Tax Assessment including an accumulated total of unused contributions that are carried forward . You are required to start taking an income from the plan not later than December 31 in the year in which you turn 71 . The income will be taxable . Different products or vehicles or accounts are eligible to be registered including mutual funds , segregated funds -LRB- Variable annuities -RRB- , stocks and GIC 's . This is a very basic summary . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Yes you can have multiple retirement plans . In Canada for example your could have a pension plan and a group registered retirement savings plan -LRB- RRSP -RRB- through your employer . In addition you could have an individual RRSP and also spousal RRSP . A Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- could also be used for retirement planning since the accumulation grows tax free and withdrawals due not attract taxation . More information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A non contributory retirement plan typically refers to a type of pension plan where the company makes all the contributions . The employees may or may not be allowed to contribute depending on the design of the plan and the applicable legislation . In Canada , the value of the company 's contribution reduces the amount you are permitted to deposit into your Registered Retirement Savings Plan -LRB- RRSP -RRB- If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
In Canada , subject to limits , you can deduct contributions made to Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- , Registered Pension Plans -LRB- RPP -RRB- and Individual Pension Plans -LRB- IPP -RRB- . The plans grow in a tax shelter and attract taxation on withdrawal . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
In Canada , your total contribution room to a Registered Retirement Savings Plan -LRB- RRSP -RRB- and Registered Pension Plan -LRB- RPP -RRB- is $ 24,70 in 2014 . This amount could be higher depending on unused amounts from previous years . What is best for you depends on your situation . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
There are non qualified , non registered retirement savings plans . Currently , one of the most popular plans is a non modified endowment contract featuring current assumption universal life with three crediting methods to choose from : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting using equities and bonds investments .
Exactly where you specifically should save money for retirement and what vehicle you should use depends on your individual situation . There are however , some general guidelines . Take advantage of plans that provide tax deferral , to allow you to benefit from the full effect of compound interest . In Canada , with Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- you can deduct your contributions -LRB- within limits -RRB- and the funds grow tax deferred until you withdraw them . Tax Free Savings Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- , provide for tax deferred growth and no tax on withdrawal . Which of these is `` best '' for you depends on your individual circumstances . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
In Canada a Registered Retirement Saving Plan is a program to encourage people to save for retirement . The plan has a number of regulations , but the basics are that you can deduct your contributions up to a yearly maximum , the grow tax sheltered and are then taxable when withdrawn . You have to start withdrawn before December 31 in the year in which to turn 71 . More information on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
A tax deferred Retirement Plan is a plan that allow the grow to accumulate tax free while it is inside the plan and taxed when it is withdrawn . This tax deferred growth provides a significant advantage over plans that are taxed each year . Why ? Because you get the full effect of compound interest . In Canada , a Registered Retirement Savings Plan RRSP -RRB- not only offers tax deferred growth , it also offers -LRB- subject to limits -RRB- tax deductibility of contributions . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Smallest Life Insurance Policy You Can Get ?
The smallest life insurance policy I know of has a $ 1,000 face amount . The policies with very small face amounts are almost always `` no exam '' policies , and are generally geared toward final expense needs . Medically underwritten policies that require an exam usually have a minimum face amount of $ 50,000 to $ 100,000 or more .
When youre looking at the question of what comes first retirement or paying off debt , the answer is paying off debt . But everything really starts with a good self-inventory of your income and expenses and setting up a budget so you can start telling your money where to go instead of wondering where it all went . If you have never made a budget I can send you a free worksheet that outlines the different categories and roughly how much of your income should be going to each . After you have your budget in place your next step is to set up an emergency fund minimum of $ 500 to $ 1000 . Having an emergency fund can take the pressure off of lifes curve balls when they happen and it helps you stay on track with your budget . Then you should start paying down your debt , start with the smallest bills first , once one is paid off add that payment to the next smallest bill . Its like a snowball rolling downhill gaining momentum tackling bill after bill with more force . Your next step is to build your emergency fund up so that it could cover 3 to 6 months of your expenses in case of job loss or medical illness . Once thats in place then you can look at retirement planning . If you have any questions please feel free to call me .
There are many choices of life insurance available to you . The main stream life insurance products are term life , universal life , variable life and whole life . Each one has a specific purpose . Term life insurance is meant to coverage a specific period of time . The common terms are 1-5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . This means the rate or premium you purchase is guaranteed level for that period of time regardless of change in health , life style or occupation . Term life is commonly used for younger people starting out in life , covering a large debt , life a mortgage on a home or business debt , or covering for a young child 's education . term life insurance allows for the largest face amount for the smallest premium payments . Universal life and variable life are permanent life insurance solutions that build cash value . Typically the premiums are more expensive and the face amounts are less because part of the premium is going into a cash value fund that can be invested with numerous options . The cash value can later be used for retirement , college funds , critical or chronic illness or even to purchase a large asset like a home . The universal and variable options are typically more aggressive with the cash value funds . The last option , whole life insurance , is very similar to the previous universal life insurance options . However , the cash value funds are typically a fixed percentage of growth . Whole life as it 's name suggests is primarily meant to cover you for your entire life . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker with numerous carriers to shop the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
Cash value life insurance products are frequently used as a retirement planning vehicle . Most nonqualified retirement plans , from the largest to the smallest companies in America , use life insurance to informally fund the retirement payments companies make to their retiring executives . So , it would stand to reason that what works for those arrangements can work for individuals , too ! With the right products , an experienced life insurance professional can design a supplemental retirement plan using life insurance to provide income in retirement , tax free -LRB- through policy loans -RRB- . Whole life is not always the best choice in terms of efficiency and flexibility . Universal life based products are better , in my experience .
You may not need Universal Life Insurance . If you have a temporary need and want a large policy for the lowest possible price , Term Life Insurance would probably work best . If you want a small final expense policy , Whole Life is easiest to get , and comes in the smallest face amounts . Where you may choose Universal Life is if you want a low cost permanent product of a substantial face amount but with little to no cash value -LRB- GUL -RRB- , or if you want to use your life insurance as a type of investment along with death benefit -LRB- VUL or IUL -RRB- .
Depends on what their assets are . Typically , there will be little money left for their family and little for burial costs . But why put your family through any of this ? Any life insurance is better than no life insurance . Even the smallest policy can pay for burial expenses . A bit more can help keep your kids in the same house and school . Even if your spouse must return to an outside job , the benefits from even a small policy can help pay some of the bills . You should discuss your needs with a qualified agent . Call me.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
The smallest premium I have seen for a permanent life insurance policy is $ 15 . The highest is in the millions . The amount of coverage that you can get for any given premium amount depends on your age , health history , tobacco use , gender , height-weight , etc. . Your independent agent can give you rates for many companies and help you understand which companies will approve you .
The smallest premium I have seen for single premium life insurance is $ 1,500 . The highest is in the millions . The amount of coverage that you can get for any given single premium depends on your age , health history , tobacco use , gender , height-weight , etc. . Your independent agent can give you rates for many companies and help you understand which companies will approve you .
The smallest premium I have seen for a life insurance policy is $ 15 . The highest is in the millions . The amount of coverage that you can get for any given premium amount depends on your age , health history , tobacco use , gender , height-weight , etc. . The biggest factors are how much coverage do you need ? And how long do you need it to cover you ? Whole-life insurance is much more expensive then term because it will always pay a death benefit no matter how old you live as long as you pay the premium . Term is temporary insurance and is much less expensive then whole-life because it will rarely ever pay a death claim . Most people do n't die at a young age and drop their term policy long before they get to the age when they are likely to die . You can always pull up free rates for term life insurance at WEBSITELINK Your independent agent can help you understand which companies will approve you .
The smallest premium I have seen for a life insurance policy is $ 15 . The highest is in the millions . The amount of coverage that you can get for any given premium amount depends on your age , health history , tobacco use , gender , height-weight , etc. . Your independent agent will give you rates for many companies and help you understand which companies will approve you .
The smallest life insurance policy I know of has a $ 1,000 face amount . The policies with very small face amounts are almost always `` no exam '' policies , and are generally geared toward final expense needs . Medically underwritten policies that require an exam usually have a minimum face amount of $ 50,000 to $ 100,000 or more .
The smallest policy I have issued was $ 5.00 a month . I have heard of agents writing huge cases for 10s of thousands of dollars a month . Really to many factors to give a good answer . The basic questions an agent is going to ask in quoting you a monthly amount are . Your age , sex , smoker or not and health . Also the amount of coverage or the need to be covered , then how long do you want the coverage . Those few bits of information can get the conversation started . A good agent will be writing the answers down and developing questions that are particular to you and your wants and needs .
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
It depends on your objectives . Parents usually buy life insurance on their children for a couple of reasons . At a minimum , you probably want at least enough to cover the cost of final arrangements -LRB- funeral , cremation , etc -RRB- . Tha smallest stand-alone policies are usually around $ 5,000 . On the other end of the scale , you may want to buy more for your child in order to lock in coverage for them as they go into adulthood , and you might look at $ 100,000 or more . Insuring children can be a smart financial decision , but I would never insure my children until I had myself insured for as much as it would take to replace the amount of my income I want my family to receive should I die .
PPO is not a type of health insurance . It is an abbreviation for Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- which describes the network provider contracting approach associated with whatever health insurance plan you are purchasing . PPO network based health insurance products have dominated the marketplace for many years so it is not unusual for the consumer to blend the two . After January 1 , 2014 you will want to have your health insurance agent check for you , or if you are a `` do it yourselfer `` do someresearching online to determine the type of provider network associated with health plans you may be interested in . The traditional features of PPO plan designs have been to have office visit & prescription copayments , lower deductibles , higher co-insurance levels and lower out-of-pocket financial exposure for using in-network PPO providers while still having coverage for voluntary usage of non-network providers at reduced benefit levels . PPO plans are the dominant network arrangement in the current health insurance marketplace . However , changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , are causing insurance carriers to re-design their products and this does extend to the design of their provider networks . This is especially true of the health insurance products sold in the government health insurance marketplaces where the consumer may encounter multiple network or sub-network type provider arrangements in this environment . For instance , here in Tennessee , the BC/BS plan offers essentially the same insurance products with pricing based on your choice of 3 different PPO networks at 3 different price points . The larger the PPO provider network you choose the higher the insurance premium associated with the product . In fact , the smallest of the 3 BC/BS network options is offered only in the government marketplace . So , these are words of caution , there are degrees of difference even within what are technically PPO based products these days . Do n't just assume that a provider is going to be in-network with an insurance carrier based upon your past experience . Verify with both the insurance carrier and the doctor 's office that they are a participating provider . Also , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace starting in 2014 , you will want to be aware of the growing move back to Point-of-Service -LRB- POS -RRB- , Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- and Accountable Care Organization -LRB- ACO -RRB- based provider delivery systems associated with a growing number of health insurance products . These other variations on the theme apply more stringent guidelines to provider access in a variety of ways -LRB- reduced network sizes , gate keeper referral arrangements , sharply reduced or no out-of-network coverage -RRB- and introduce entirely new considerations for the consumer .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
At what age do you get life insurance has a simple answer . You can get life insurance at any age . Your parents can get it for you the day you are born if they so choose . Perhaps the better question might be when should you consider getting life insurance ? If you have a family , spouse or just children you should consider getting life insurance . If you own a small business , have key employee 's and/or a business partner , you might consider life insurance . If your concerned about your estate or would like to build tax free income for retirement , you might consider life insurance . You see , it really is not about your age so much but what is the purpose of the insurance . That said , the younger you are , the cost if insurance is less .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
home-insurance
Who Has The Cheapest Home Insurance ?
The cheapest homeowners policy is the one that pays the maximum amount possible when you have a claim . Of course it must be a policy on your house and it must be in force . What was paid for the policy is insignificant in many cases . The cheapest policy is sold by your trusted insurance agent , someone who listens to you , gives you sound financial advice and communicates clearly with you and the insurance company . That agent will do their best to make sure you are protected .
Your neighbor and yourself with similiar house values could get insurance from the same company and your rates will be different . Insurance premiums are determined by many factors , including your insurance score , loss history , the existance of dogs , trampolines , pools , oil tanks , etc. . They best way to get the best coverage for yourself at the best rate is to have an a local reputable independent agent with access to multiple carriers take one application for you and then they will shop all of their markets .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
As with most everything in life , the best and the cheapest are rarely the same thing and you do tend to get what you pay for . The cheapest health insurance that meets the requirements under ObamaCare will have a very high deductible and have you paying for all health care services -LRB- except preventive care -RRB- out of your pocket until you have met that deductible that may be $ 6000 or more . If you never use any health care during the year then this would meet your criteria for being the cheapest and perhaps the best . The best heath insurance plans that meet the requirements under ObamaCare will provide you with reasonable copayments , a low deductible and relatively low out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure -LRB- maybe as low as several hundred or a thousand dollars -RRB- . However , these plans will have a significantly higher monthly premium . The true answer to your question is unique to each individual . You would be well served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you define your needs and budget and then find the best health insurance plan -LRB- either in the government marketplaces or outside them -RRB- that fits your needs .
The answer to who has the cheapest Disability Insurance in Wisconsin will vary from person to person . That is because some companies cater to certain professions , others have the best price for persons of a certain age , etc. . And the price will vary depending on the bells and whistles you choose , the elimination period you select , and other features . Using a broker that sells Disability Insurance from multiple companies can help you find the cheapest rate for the best coverage .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
You can find the cheapest auto insurance at your agents office . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy with adequate limits that pays damages that result from an accident . Since this can involve personal injury and property damage , the amount can increase rapidly . Your agent will listen to you , offer sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . When you have a claim , you will be happy that you have the cheapest insurancethe one that pays !
The cheapest life insurance policy is the one that you already own . The cheapest life insurance policy you can buy is one that is scheduled to expire the day after you die . The fact is that the cheapest life insurance policy is always the one that is in force on the day that you die . If that is your concern work with a good life insurance agent . The agent can match your needs with a policy that will fit into your budget . Remember that when you save money on the premium and the policy expires before you die ; it is your loved ones that pay the price .
The cheapest renters policy is not the one with the lowest premium . The cheapest renters policy is the one that pays the most when you have a claim . The place to purchase the cheapest renters policy is from a trusted insurance agent . The agents advice and help in setting appropriate limits could save you thousands of dollars .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Still Accept Paper Claims ?
As far as I know , Medicare does not accept paper claim forms . At least one source indicates there may be exceptions to the electronic claim rules . `` Small '' providers may be exempt from submitting electronic claims as may providers that have fewer than 10 Medicare claims per month . Check with your Medicare claims administrator for determination .
I suppose Medicare can accept paper claims but I am not aware of any providers that submit paper claims . All provider claims for several years have been submitted electronically . Any medical provider that treats a Medicare beneficiary is required to file claims with Medicare regardless of whether they accept assignment or not .
Medicare claims are handled electronically by medical providers . I have never seen a paper claim form for Medicare and doubt if it exists . All providers that treat Medicare beneficiaries are requried to file claims with Medicare . It does not matter if your provider accepts assignment or not . They must still file the claim on a timely basis .
As far as I know , Medicare does not accept paper claim forms . At least one source indicates there may be exceptions to the electronic claim rules . `` Small '' providers may be exempt from submitting electronic claims as may providers that have fewer than 10 Medicare claims per month . Check with your Medicare claims administrator for determination .
In addition to what Bob has said , I would recommend picking up the excellent government booklet named Choosing a Medgap Policy . You can download it free from the Medicare website or order a paper copy free . Your Medicare Insurance broker can supply you with free copies of these as well . The chart on page 11 -LRB- of the 2012 version -RRB- makes it easier to understand what each Medicare Supplement Plan covers . The hardest thing for most people to accept at first is that the Lettered Plan is what makes the difference in your coverage NOT the brand of the insurance company you buy it from . People start out thinking that AARP 's plan is different from Gerber 's plan or Aetna 's plan . It 's hard for them to accept that the brand makes no difference . It 's the lettered plan that makes the difference . Once you choose which lettered plan you want , then you shop the different companies prices on the plan you choose . Your insurance broker should be able to show you the rates for all the companies that you want to consider .
Let me differentiate between a liability claim and a property claim . If you are sued , notify the claims office of the insurance company immediately . Do not sign any papers and do not make any statements to agents of the individual or company suing you . Never hesitate to submit a liability claim . If your home is uninhabitable because of a covered loss such as fire or lightning call the insurance company claims office immediately . If you are the victim of a disaster , call the claims office immediately . Many insurance companies have mobile claims operations that are dispatched to help victims of disasters . Any damage to your home is a big deal . However , if the damage is not more than two times your deductible , and it pays to know your deductible , call your agent first . Property insurance policies have varying features that can either reduce the deductible or reduce the premium if your policy is claims free . Sometimes a little pencil work will show that it is better to forgo the claim as the reductions you receive for being claims free could be greater than the amount you would recover . If there is water damage and you can not reach your agent quickly enough contact the claims office because water damage only gets worse ! Often a quick responding water mitigation team can reduce and almost eliminate the loss .
You can buy term life insurance in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- with an exam , or 2 -RRB- without an exam . 1 -RRB- With an exam . You would choose this option if you have reasonably good health , because you will be evaluated by your exam results to see if you qualify . Also , taking a medically underwritten policy that requires an exam is generally for those who want a larger face amount than a a burial policy . It can save you money to go to the added effort of taking the exam , and the exam does not incur any cost to you . It is generally done in your home , and entails a blood sample , urine sample , height , weight , blood pressure , pulse , and medical questions . Backing up , you first contact a website or agency to decide what face amount and length of term you want . You will be asked many medical questions to determine which company has your best price . Then you fill out an application , either by paper or online or over the phone . The exam follows , and possibly the underwriter will order medical records from your doctor -LRB- s -RRB- . When a decision has been made , some agents call you to tell you -LRB- e.g. we give you the option to change the face amount or term if it did not turn out as hoped -RRB- . Some just mail you the policy . You accept it by filling out some delivery paperwork . Payment can be done by check -LRB- almost always reserved for quarterly , semi-annual or annual payments -RRB- or bank or credit card draft . 2 -RRB- Without an exam . People often choose this method for : a. smaller policies , b. because they can not qualify for a policy that requires an exam , c. because they do not like having their blood drawn , and/or d. because they do n't want to go through the hassle of an exam . Some no exam policies have quite reasonable rates , especially for those who would qualify as standard on medically underwritten policies . This type of application is usually filled out online and signed digitally , but can be done by paper application , as well . The process goes a lot faster than applying for a policy requiring an exam . The policy often goes into effect as soon as approved and the first payment is drafted . I hope that helps . Please feel free to contact me for more information .
A Money Market Fund can be a type of Mutual Fund . It refers to a fund that invests in short term debt securities such as treasury bills -LRB- T-bills -RRB- , commercial paper , certificates of deposit and bankers acceptance . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Once you apply for new home insurance , and have been accepted by your new company , all you have to do is contact your current agent or insurance company . I suggest doing it in writing so there is a paper trail . If you let them know you have new insurance , and tell them what day to cancel your current policy , they should take care of the request and you should get a pro-rated refund from the current carrier . DO NOT write on the bill and mail it in as most insurance companies have thousands of payments coming in every day , the bills do n't get looked at by people , so if you write a request on your bill they might not see it .
To answer the question of how to apply for life insurance , I would need to know the type of policy for which you are applying . 1 -RRB- Medically Underwritten This is the type of policy that requires some type of exam , and possibly the life insurance company will order your medical records . Applying for this type of policy requires that a fairly lengthy application be completed . It may be filled out on paper , digitally or over the phone . You might do it with your agent , with your paramed examiner , on your own , or with a representative of the insurance company . Once everything is collected by the underwriter , the company decides what to rate you , and you generally accept the policy by paying the first premium . Because there are so many different types of medically underwritten policies , there are a number of variations on how to apply for them . 2 -RRB- Simplified Issue Simplified Issue policies do not require an exam . Some never require medical records , while others order medical records as needed . Filling out the applications for simplified issue life insurance has about as many choices as medically underwritten applications . However , these policies tend to go into effect much more quickly , and it is often their practice to draft the first premium as soon as you apply or are approved . 3 -RRB- Guaranteed Issue Guaranteed Issue Life Insurance does not ask any health questions and has no medical requirements at all . It does not usually entail a phone interview , although applications are usually done face to face with an agent . Generally , these policies are graded and should go into effect within days .
There is much misinformation spread about this topic . The former answer at least implies that a doctor can just `` decide '' whether to accept Medicare assignment or not . It is important to understand that this is only true if a doctor has signed a non-participating agreement with Medicare . Most doctors -LRB- approx . 97 % -RRB- are contracted with Medicare as `` participating physicians '' , and as such must accept Medicare assignment , i.e. the Medicare approved amount for the service as payment in full . Participating physicians are not permitted to bill any Part B excess charges . Next , the former example given is simply incorrect : `` if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . '' The truth is that if the doctor is contracted as `` non-participating '' with Medicare and chooses not to accept assignment , they are first penalized 5 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- $ 400 x 5 % = $ 20 penalty -RRB- . Medicare will only reimburse $ 380 for this example -LRB- $ 400 - $ 20 penalty -RRB- . The doctor can bill you up to 15 % of the $ 380 as an excess charge in this example , or $ 57 . In not accepting assignment , the doctor may bill/collect $ 437 -LRB- $ 380 Medicare reimbursement + $ 57 excess charge -RRB- . This gives the doctor the opportunity to receive $ 437 instead of the $ 400 Medicare assignment , which in effect is a 9.25 % increase in revenue . Non-Participating physicians can decide whether to accept Medicare assignment on a case by case basis , and often do accept assignment , because if they do not , Medicare reimburses the claim to the beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- , and the physician then must collect the reimbursement and the excess charge from the consumer in full . This adds administrative and collection costs that many non-Par physicians do not want to deal with . The former answer states that If you live in one of the states banning Part B excess charges , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . But the truth is that Part B excess charges are not a concern , let alone a major concern , regardless of what state you are living in . For the reasons stated , Part B excess charges are rarely billed . Ask any Medicare beneficiary when was the last time they received a claim payment directly from Medicare -LRB- required if doctor was non-Par and refused assignment -RRB- . You will be hard pressed to find anyone answering yes .
Not at all . However , as was said above , there are applications for life insurance which would ask abotu STD 's . Still , the major one life insurance comapanies are most concerned with remains AIDS/HIV . Also DMV records and such depending on your age . However , if you have gotten treated for Herpes and there is something on paper ata doctor 's office saying as much , it MIGHT pop up on the medical records check that a life insurance company might do . Just an FYI .
When the insurance company denies a homeowners policy claim you can pursue the claim further . The policy itself might state that you must submit to arbitration , however , competent legal counsel can best direct your activity . A scan of the newspaper will show that courts get involved with denied claims and have made some startling judgments . One was in our paper yesterday .
The key to a successful claim is records . Photographic , scanned , or paper . If you can verify the condition of your home and the complete list of contents you are almost already home . Few home claims have that information . It only takes a few minutes to get prepared for the claim . Take photos or use a video camera but get a record . Keep the record where it wont be destroyed with the home .
You follow the prompts on the screen . However , when it comes to life insurance , I always recommend to my clients to do a paper app . There 's a lot more involved in the life insurance process than there is for some other types of coverage , especially if you have a medical history - it 's a lot easier to make sure everything is in good order with a paper app than doing it online , plus you have a hard copy of everything for your records . You also do n't want to apply to multiple companies at the same time - this can work against you because it 'll raise a red flag to insurance companies . There 's a lot of moving parts in life insurance underwriting.You will want to work with an independent life insurance agent/broker to secure your coverage . They can help you through the process -LRB- providing quotes from multiple insurance companies , helping determine which program best serves your needs , completing the application , keeping track of underwriting , and placing the coverage in force -RRB- . If you would like help with your program , send me a message using the `` contact me '' button .
To purchase a No Exam life insurance policy , you first must fill out the application . This can be done by paper or done together with your agent on the phone . If the latter , you will get a link by email that allows you to sign the application digitally . No Exam life insurance policies usually ask you for payment information on the application . That way they can draft the first premium from your checking account or credit card immediately upon approval , which allows the policy to go into effect much faster . Some No Exam life insurance policies do not look at medical records , and those policies can go into effect in hours . Some No Exam companies reserve the right to look at medical records . If they do order records , the process will take longer , but still not usually as long as a policy requiring an exam .
If she can not remember if she has a life insurance policy but can remember the company name or agent 's name you need to start there . I am sure you have looked through her important papers and may be still can not find them , there are some websites to assist you . First is the NAIC or National Association of Insurance Commissioners . There website is free at WEBSITELINK web map.htm this site will lead you to her state 's DOI site where the policy should be registered as to the carrier purchased so you will know who to call . If that one is empty , the next step is to try the MIB Solutions website at WEBSITELINK life insurance howto.htm . This website boasts a 30 % success rate in finding lost policies and charges $ 75 per search . Just be careful if choosing a life settlement company to check on the company 's reputation . Unfortunately , there are a lot of scams involving these actions . Good luck !
There 's a big difference between the two . A mutual fund is an investment vehicle operated by an investment company which pools the assets of many individuals . The money raised is then invested in accordance with pre-defined goals . Money market funds : These funds invest in a variety of short term , money market debt such as Treasure bills or commercial paper . Growth funds : have an emphasis on long-term capital growth , usually through investment in common stock . Income funds : Focus on providing high , current income , using bonds and other income producing securities . Balanced funds : strive to provide income and long-term capital gain . Both stocks and bonds are used . Keep in mind that mutual funds have risk and you can lose money.Non-qualified tax deferred annuities have basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
There are many companies that offer universal life insurance , however , the products can vary substantially between carriers . The first thing you want to find out is which products are guaranteed universal life programs , meaning even if the cash value hit $ 0 , the policy will still pay a death benefit as long as you keep paying your premiums . Current assumption -LRB- non-guaranteed -RRB- universal life programs can seem great on paper , but carry a lot of risk - if the cash value hits $ 0 under these programs , then the policy crashes and you 're left with no benefits . You would subsequently have to keep paying more and more into the policy at higher amounts to keep it going . When comparing the plans from each carrier , you want to look at what risk class you qualify for -LRB- this determines the premiums - not every carrier is going to offer the same risk class for a given medical profile -RRB- , the cost of insurance under the plan , the interest rates -LRB- guaranteed vs. current -RRB- , and the cash value build in the policy . Work with an independent life insurance agent/broker so you can compare quotes from multiple carriers and review the benefits under each program available in the marketplace with someone who has the knowledge of how the programs work and which one will offer you the most favorable benefit structure . If you 'd like my assistance or have any questions , send me a message using the `` contact me '' button .
A mutual fund is an investment vehicle operated by an investment company which pools the assets of many individuals . The money raised is then invested in accordance with pre-defined goals . Money market funds : These funds invest in a variety of short term , money market debt such as Treasure bills or commercial paper . Growth funds : have an emphasis on long-term capital growth , usually through investment in common stock . Income funds : Focus on providing high , current income , using bonds and other income producing securities . Balanced funds : strive to provide income and long-term capital gain . Both stocks and bonds are used . Keep in mind that mutual funds have risk and you can lose money . Non-qualified tax deferred annuities have basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
When Does Disability Insurance Kick In ?
Your disability benefits `` kick in '' or begin to pay once you have been diagnosed with an injury or illness by a licensed physician and the elimination period has been met . Your medical diagnosis must state you are unable to perform the duties of your normal occupation due to this affliction . The elimination period can vary from a day to 360 days depending on the type of disability policy that you own .
Disability benefits kick in once you have satisfied the elimination period . The elimination period describes the length of time you must be disabled before benefit payments begin . You will have to check your policy to determine the elimination period . Every policy is different . In general shorter elimination periods mean higher premiums . Many people opt for the lower premium configuration when purchasing the policy , only to regret the decision when learning how long it takes to kick in once disabled .
When does disability insurance kick in ? You can expect to receive a disability check 30 days after your waiting period ends . The waiting period is the time you decide to self insure to lower your premium . The longer the waiting period , the lower the cost . Payments actually begin 30 days after the end of the waiting period .
The amount of time it takes for disability insurance to kick in depends on the elimination period chosen when the policy was purchased . The shorter the elimination period , and the sooner the disability benefits kick in , the higher the premium usually is . A common elimination period for long term disability insurance is three months .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
No , Disability Insurance and Long Term Care Insurance are not the same . However , they are more alike than they used to be . Disability Insurance pays you cash during each week that you are unable to work . You can use this cash in any way that you want . Long Term Care Insurance policies in the past would pay the nursing home if you were unable to care for yourself . Many newer Long Term Care policies give you the option of receiving a cash benefit to use as you wish . When it is determined that you need assistance to take care of yourself , these LTCI policies pay you cash to pay for a caregiver in your home , to pay for assisted living , or whatever arrangement works best for you . The trigger for Disability Insurance to kick in is being unable to work at your place of employment . The trigger for Long Term Care Insurance to kick in is to be unable to perform two or more ADL 's for an extended period of time .
Groups short term disability insurance , or `` sick leave '' does usually pay for maternity leave . You need to obtain the coverage at least a year before becoming pregnant in order for the group policy to cover your time off before and after having your baby . Private Disability Insurance does not pay for maternity leave unless there are complications with the pregnancy or childbirth , upon which the long term disability coverage would kick in after the policy 's elimination period is met .
YES , you can Buy Individual Short-Term Disability Insurance . Short-term meaning immediate upon being disabled up to 12 months . After 12 months , you can have a Long-Term Disability plan kick in . When you look at these plans , be sure to look at the definitions of disability , partial disability , cost of living adjustments and retroactive coverage for the long-term disability . These should be a part of most policies which take care of all the `` gray '' areas of coverage . For more information , do not hesitate to ask .
Long Term Disability Insurance kicks in after : 1 -RRB- you suffer a qualifying disability per the terms set for in the Disability policy , and 2 -RRB- the elimination period has passed . You select the elimination period when you purchase the policy ; in long term disability insurance it is usually several months .
When does disability insurance kick in ? You can expect to receive a disability check 30 days after your waiting period ends . The waiting period is the time you decide to self insure to lower your premium . The longer the waiting period , the lower the cost . Payments actually begin 30 days after the end of the waiting period .
Yes you can . It is called Short Term Medical -LRB- STM -RRB- and it is available in most states . It allows you to purchase a STM policy for , usually , up to 6 months . After that you can usually apply for 6 more months if you still qualify . You can choose a plan for a little as 30 days and you can not have other insurance in place during the time you will have your STM in place . STM does not cover pre-existing conditions . It only covers you for what happens from the date your plan starts to the date your plan ends and therefore it costs a lot less than a traditional plan . Remember they do not have to renew your plan if you ended up using your plan for something significant , health wise . STM is a great plan for healthy adults whom have 6 months left before turning 65 . It has saved a lot of my healthy clients money during those 6 months before Medicare kicks in . It 's a great plan for those in between jobs who ca n't afford the high cost of COBRA and for those whom start a new job and have a 30-60 day waiting period before their new companies insurance kicks in . Remember , it does NOT cover pre-existing such as a hernia you got diagnosed over a year ago but did n't do something about then that ruptures during your STM plan period . I just signed up a 21 year old for one month in Oregon and the cost for a $ 500 deductible , 80/20 plan was only $ 60 including the $ 20 one time enrollment fee . You can view a few plan options here for Oregon and Assurant , which is available in most States . www.coveroregon.cc Click on Products at the top of the page and then scroll down and on the right hand side it will say Short Term Medical ; to give you an idea of rates . Make sure to click on Assurant for rates outside of Oregon . Short Term Medical is a great option for those whom did not sign up during Open Enrollment and are healthy , just looking to be protected from an accident , emergency room visit , unexpected illness , spider bite , etc. .
Disability Insurance kicks in once a person has been declared disabled by the definition of the Insurance company offering coverage . Typically a disabled person has trouble with returning to full time work in their chosen profession . The definitions for Disabled vary but once a person qualifies they can receive a portion of their income based on how the policy was set up . Sometimes this type of insurance is purchased by an individual , sometimes by a company for its employees . Social Security even offers a disability benefit .
Short Term Disability is used to replace approx 40-70 % of your salary if disabled for a `` short '' period of time . Most short term disabilities last from 3-6 months , although the cap can be as high as two years . The coverage may kick in as soon as the disability is determined , or there may be a waiting period . If purchasing your own policy , the higher the premium you pay , the shorter the waiting period . Some of the uses for short term disability are partial income replacement in case of pregnancy , muscle strains , broken bones , pneumonia , heart attack , or chemotherapy treatments .
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
Long Term Disability Insurance policies pay out a cash benefit when the insured person is unable to work due to injury or illness . When you buy the policy , you select an elimination period , which is the amount of time you will need to wait until the coverage kicks in . The longer the elimination period , the lower the premium . Then you select a length of time that you want the coverage to last . This can be from a couple years to a lifetime . There are other features to choose from , as well , and all are important in how your policy will pay out if you need to use it . To get a long term disability policy that you can rely on to pay out if you are disabled for over a few months , contact a trusted broker who can explain all the features and help you get a policy that work well for you .
When a disabling event occurs -LRB- illness or injury that causes the insured person to be unable to work for an extended period of time -RRB- , the long term disability insurance kicks in when the days of the elimination period have passed . The most common elimination period that people choose is 90 days .
Under no circumstances can they term you without a reason . The reasons are also limited as to why the can term you . They can not kick you off the plan due to health conditions you acquired while you had the plan . When you hear rumors of people getting kicked off their plan because they became sick , they are just that , rumors . Failure to pay premium , plan discontinuation , employer dropping the plan , moving out of the plans service area are the main reasons a person would lose their coverage . They can not cancel insurance because someone has been incurring a high number of claims . I would suggest there must be some type of error with your cancellation . You should call the insurance company and ask them why they have termed you . They will have an answer whether it is legit or not is a different story but if they have termed you due to some error , you will be able to get reinstated .
Group Long Term Disability Insurance is a policy that will pay you part of your wages if you are unable to work due to a disability . Disability payments do not kick in until an amount of time has passed called an elimination period . That is usually 30 to 365 days , with 90 days being the average . The policy can pay the benefit for as short as two years or as long as when the employee retires .
What is elimination period in long term care insurance ? The elimination period is the amount of time you choose to self insure the situation before the long term care insurance kicks in to cover costs . The elimination period gives you options about how soon your long term care kicks in . The shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium . If you can extend your elimination period , usually you 'll see a considerable reduction in cost .
Some Disability Insurance policies will pay a survivor benefit if the insured person dies . This can go to a surviving spouse or children . Certain conditions must be met for this benefit go kick in . However , Disability Insurance is primarily designed to make payments to the insured person while they are still alive , but disabled . Life Insurance is what covers death .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Paid Family Leave Disability Insurance ?
You may be referring to Paid Family Leave offered by the state of California . Workers who contribute to the State Disability Insurance fund are entitled to 6 weeks of family leave to bond with a new baby or child joining the family , or to care for an ailing family member . During this time , part of their wages will be paid to them . While California 's Disability Insurance is also funded by paying into SDI , it is different from Paid Family Leave in that it provides partial payment of wages in case of disability from a non-work related cause , or due to pregnancy or childbirth .
You may be referring to Paid Family Leave offered by the state of California . Workers who contribute to the State Disability Insurance fund are entitled to 6 weeks of family leave to bond with a new baby or child joining the family , or to care for an ailing family member . During this time , part of their wages will be paid to them . While California 's Disability Insurance is also funded by paying into SDI , it is different from Paid Family Leave in that it provides partial payment of wages in case of disability from a non-work related cause , or due to pregnancy or childbirth .
Disability insurance and the Family Medical Leave Act -LRB- FMLA -RRB- are two different animals . Disability insurance replaces a portion of income during the time the insured is unable to work due to a covered medical condition . FMLA is a federal law which provides unpaid job protected leave when an employee has to stop working due to his or her own disability , or to care for a sick family member . Disability insurance will not cover an FMLA leave when the employee is caring for a sick family member . It may cover the FMLA leave for an employee 's own disability . However the length of leave under FMLA -LRB- 12 weeks maximum -RRB- is different than the disability leave -LRB- while disabled up to the policy 's maximum benefit period -RRB- .
To answer your question requires us to consider the requirements under law for the family medical leave act . The FMLA imposes upon employers certain obligations to provide the employee unpaid leave from their job without fear of losing their job . Employees continue to enjoy employer provided medical benefits as if they are active at work . Maternity leave is an eligible medical event . Employees are entitled to up to twelve work weeks of leave in a 52 week year . Seek out more information by searching the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 for more information . Now , as to obtaining an `` extended , paid maternity leave from your job '' , you seem to be asking on whether there is a way to buy an extended period of benefit for a group , employer sponsored medical or disability income program . I have not encountered this option as a benefit in 38 years of work in this industry but , the best option is to contact the benefits administrator or Human Resources at your employer with this question . No optional benefit available will waive the rights or duties of the employer under common policy and practice , nor under the FLMA of 1993 . There are indemnification type health insurance policies that may provide some cash benefit , and you can buy disability insurance prior to the pregancy that can cover medical as a disability , but they wo n't impact the employer benefits nor their right to expect you to return to work when their maternity leave expires . The indemnity policies and disability insurance will have specific underwriting requirements and being currently pregnant is likely to be a condition that prohibits a benefit until the pregnancy runs its course .
There are three states with paid family leave programs : California , New Jersey , and Rhode Island . Each state also provides state short term disability , and uses the same reimbursement rates , and the same infrastructure for collecting premiums and making claims payments . The qualifying criteria are different . Disability makes payments when the employee is disabled , while paid family leave makes payments when the employee is caring for a sick family member .
No . Paid family leave is an employee benefit and one not offered by all employers . It may be taken in conjunction with a disabling event but it is in no way disability insurance . The Federal Family Medical Leave Act -LRB- FMLA -RRB- provides certain employees with up to 12-weeks of UNPAID , job protected leave per year and it does require that group health benefits be maintained during such a leave . The FMLA applies only in specific life circumstances and is applicable to all public agencies , public & private elementary and secondary schools and companies with 50 or more employees .
Short term disability and FMLA are two distinct entities , although both may apply when an employee needs to take leave . Short term disability is an insurance program that replaces a portion of income when an employee is unable to work due to a covered accident or illness . Five states have mandatory programs , some employers pay premiums on behalf of employees , and many employees purchase policies at work and pay through a payroll deduction . FMLA is a federal law which provides unpaid job protected leave for an employees own disability , or when leaving work to care for a sick family member .
FMLA -LRB- Family and Medical Leave Act -RRB- appears to be only required for health insurance , and not life insurance . However , employer and employee can work together to ensure that life insurance premiums are paid during the employee 's time off so that their life insurance benefits are not cancelled during family leave .
To protect the financial future of your family should you pass away unexpectedly . If you died tomorrow . What kind of debt would you leave your family strapped with ? Would you want your kids to be able to go to college ? Do you have a charity that you would like to leave a legacy with ? Life insurance can help provide for your family 's financial future in the event of your passing . As always , remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to know what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Individual disability policies do not offer maternity leave benefits . However , some group disability insurance policies may provide maternity benefits - not all do though -LRB- be sure to note that -RRB- . If you have a group disability policy , be sure to check the benefits under your policy - especially the definition of disability -LRB- many group DI policies feature a `` gainful occupation '' definition -RRB- - certain conditions likely will need to be met for a maternity leave benefit claim to be approved . If you 're looking for individual disability insurance or to set up a group disability policy , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group with a strong disability insurance background . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
It depends on what you 're looking for . Term life plans are designed to cover large items -LRB- like a house -RRB- that will still need to be paid after you die in order to make it easier for the people you leave behind . Once the item is paid off , term life is n't as important . Whole life can be used as a gift , to pay for funeral expenses , or to leave a legacy to your family . Some plans can be used as a source of income if you need extra money . Then there are hybrid plans that combine some of the above features . The best option is to talk to an independent broker in your area that has studied all of these types and discuss your needs . They will be happy to help you find the plan that works best for you .
Groups short term disability insurance , or `` sick leave '' does usually pay for maternity leave . You need to obtain the coverage at least a year before becoming pregnant in order for the group policy to cover your time off before and after having your baby . Private Disability Insurance does not pay for maternity leave unless there are complications with the pregnancy or childbirth , upon which the long term disability coverage would kick in after the policy 's elimination period is met .
State Disability Insurance is offered by the State of California through the Economic Development Dept. You are eligible for State Disability Insurance if : 1 -RRB- You are not a government worker -LRB- there are some exceptions , such as some teachers may receive it through collective bargaining -RRB- ; 2 -RRB- you must have been working or actively looking for work when your disability begins ; 3 -RRB- you must be unable to work and be off work for at least 8 days to receive a benefit ; 4 -RRB- you must have received at least $ 300 in wages from which State Disability Insurance deductions were withheld ; 5 -RRB- you must be under a doctor 's care and he/she must provide certification of your care , 6 -RRB- you are not receiving unemployment or Paid Family Leave ; 7 -RRB- you are not receiving Worker 's Comp at a higher rate than your DI rate , 8 -RRB- you are suffering a loss of wages due to your disability , 9 -RRB- you are not incarcerated , and 10 -RRB- you apply for the DI benefits within 49 days of suffering your disability .
To really get an answer , you need to ask yourself ` What happens to my family and beneficiaries if I die tomorrow ? ' . If there are family members and other beneficiaries that depend on you financially , the answer should be clear ; Any death benefit that they receive willnot replace the void from your passing but it will certainly help reduce the burden of any financial obligations that you had been helping to cover , i.e. mortgage , car payments , debt , student loans , living expenses and the list can go on . Further , life insurance can help you leave a legacy or gift for your loved ones that can help them for years to come . And if there are beneficiaries that you would desire to leave money for , you can always name a non-profit or charity as a beneficiary , i.e. Alma matter , favorite charitable organization , museum , zoo , etc. . Insurance proceeds , which are tax-free , can be used to fund education for children and grandchildren , family trip to help heal together after the loss of your life , remove financial uncertainty about a spouse or child 's retirement or an endless list of other possibilities . It is an invaluable gift over and above the sum of money that they could receive . The bottom line is , whatever you can comfortably afford in premiums , will create a larger sum of money that will help change your beneficiaries and loved ones ' lives for the better .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Per wikipedia : Disability Insurance , often called DI or disability income insurance , is a form of insurance that insures the beneficiary 's earned income against the risk that a disability creates a barrier for a worker to complete the core functions of their work . For example the inability to focus or maintain composure as with psychological disorders or an injury , illness or condition that causes physical impairment or incapacity to work . It encompasses paid sick leave , short-term disability benefits , and long-term disability benefits . Statistics show that in the US a disabling accident occurs on average once every second . In fact , Nearly 18.5 % of Americans are currently living with a Disability , and 1 out of every 4 persons in the US workforce will suffer a disabling injury before retirement .
If you and/or your family would be in trouble if you were to be off work for a week or more , you should buy Short Term Disability Insurance . If you have little to no sick leave at your place of employment , you may want to buy Short Term Disability Insurance . Unlike Long Term Disability Insurance that has a waiting period before you can collect on it , STDI will pay within days . So any family that relies on one salary to pay important bills without reserves to pay them should consider purchasing this type of coverage .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Great question ! The beneficiary is the person or thing -LRB- in some cases -RRB- that you wish to leave your money to . People typically leave it to a close family member , but there are people that leave it to , trust funds , churches , or charities . I remember not too long ago about reading about the lady in New York City that left her fortune to her dogs ... Thanks for asking !
Statistically , nearly everyone will at some point need some type of care in their lifetime . As we get older our health declines . We are unable to do things for ourselves . The cost can be tremendous . Nursing Home average cost is between $ 6000 and $ 7000 . Cost for Assisted Living runs around $ 4000 . Home Health Care runs between $ 15 and $ 20 per hour . Medicare is very limited on what they will pay and does not pay for custodial care . The options , the family can try to care for the loved one . While many families try to take care of their loved one at home , the burden can be great , especially if the family has children in addition to caring for a loved one . Very often the situation is so bad it becomes nearly impossible without help . You can private pay for help either at home or a care facility , but it does n't take a mathematician to figure out that any assets would be rapidly depleted leading to the final option , go on Medicaid . Long Term Care provides funds to pay for care without having to lose everything you have worked hard to provide and the legacy you wanted to leave behind for your children and grandchildren . It relieves the burden and embarassment of having our personal needs taken care of by family members . Anyone who has ever been a caregiver knows how hard it can be . Why buy Long Term Care Insurance ? Because you love your family !
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Jewelry ?
Yes , however there is usually a set amount they will pay . If you have expensive jewelry you can schedule the jewelry by having each item appraised and listed specifically on your policy . Check with your agent on the requirements and premium for the additional coverage as well as the limit for your basic coverage .
Jewelry is covered under a homeowners policy . Most homeowners policies have an internal limit to the amount of coverage for jewelry . Under the homeowners policy the loss of jewelry is subject to the deductible on the policy . People are rarely satisfied with the adjustment made on jewelry under their homeowners policy . A jewelry floater is supplemental coverage that can be provided and it will replace the lost jewelry or pay a stated amount . This coverage must be backed up by an appraisal . There isnt usually a deductible on a jewelry floater .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Jewelry is personal property and is covered by a homeowners policy . Most homeowners policies limit the recovery on jewelry and many offer a floater that provides worldwide coverage without a deductible for jewelry . There is an additional charge for that coverage . If jewelry is lost or damaged and not included in a floater , it will be adjusted on the replacement or depreciated value depending on the type of personal property coverage elected . The result will be reduced by the deductible .
A rider , in this case attached to a Homeowners ' policy , will somehow alter the standard terms and conditions of that policy . One example is a jewelry rider which is used to specifically insure a piece of jewelry to it 's appraised value . Ordinarily unscheduled jewelry can be covered in a standard contract , but the loss causes that are covered can be more limited than those provided in the rider . Another example is a rider to include Earth Movement as a covered peril . This is typically excluded from a Homeowners ' policy but the coverage can be included by use of this rider .
A standard renters insurance policy does cover jewelry loss or damage , if as a result of a covered peril . However , these policies contain a limit to the amount that will be paid for each jewelry item . The limits are generally $ 1,000 or $ 1,500 for each piece or a set amount for all jewelry lost or damaged at one time by one occurrence . So , obviously you could have jewelry that is worth a lot more than you would receive in the event of a covered loss . If such a situation exists for you , consider buying additional insurance based on the values of the jewelry . This can be done on an endorsement or separate policy . Check with your agent as to your options . Also , be aware that some pieces may need to be appraised before determining the premium you will be charged .
It depends on what happens to your engagement ring . Homeowners insurance provides a limited amount of coverage for jewelry and the coverage is for `` named perils '' only . Examples of `` named perils '' are Fire , Theft , Lightning , Water damage ect . A better way to protect jewelry items is to schedule the items on a jewelry policy or also known as an Inland Marine policy . With a jewelry policy your items are covered for a special value and the coverage is `` all risk '' meaning anything that happens to the item is covered . Even if you lose the item or the prong come loose and the diamond falls out .
Any time it comes to jewelry your homeowners policy can be very limited . Even if you purchased increased limits this may still not be enough and your deductible applies . The other factor to consider is this type of claim can go against you and increase your homeowners insurance rates . I highlyrecommendyou purchase a personal articles floater for jewelry . A PAF was give you the proper coverage jewelry and in most cases a zero deductible . Also the big benefit is there is no negative effect on yourhomeownersinsurance if you file a claim .
This is a great question because a lot of people do not consider this when purchasing Homeowner 's Insurance . Your Homeowner 's insurance will generally cover your jewelry up to a certain amount . However , if you schedule the pieces of jewelry individually and specify their value , they will be covered up to theirinsuredvalue . The benefit of scheduling the items is that the items would be covered for theft and mysterious disappearance everywhere in the world . I hope this answers your question !
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses for named perils . Named perils usually include Fire , Theft , Lightning , Water -LRB- not Flood -RRB- and other acts of God . Unfortunately , losing an item is not a named peril . You would have coverage for jewelry if one of the named perils occurred but even then most policies have a limit for jewelry so check with your agent . A much better solution for jewelry is an Inland Marine or Jewelry policy . These are separate policieswith `` all risk '' coverageso anything that happens to the item it 's covered , even if you lose it .
Almost all homeowners insurance policies provide limited coverage for jewelry . If you have a piece of jewelry that is over $ 1000 for a single piece it will more than likely need to be scheduled on your homeowners policy to be properly covered . Remember every policy and carrier are different . Read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
Homeowners insurance covers personal property `` any where in the world '' however , most policies cover personal property on a named peril basis . Unfortunately losing something is not a named peril . Examples of named perils are fire , theft , and lightning . When it comes to jewelry , I always recommend a separate jewelry policy referred to as an Inland Marine policy . Inland Marine policies are `` all risk '' policies so even if you lose a scheduled item it 's covered .
A homeowners policy provides a stated amount of coverage for personal property . This is `` unscheduled personal property . '' There is an option to purchase a floater where specific items will be insured to full value , and the deductible is not charged . This is called scheduled property . Not all property can be scheduled . It must be replaceable and the value set by a competent appraiser . This type of coverage is used most frequently for jewelry because the homeowners policy has a limit for coverage for jewelry .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
Usually , but in a fairly limited way . If there is coverage , it will be for the named perils listed in the policy AND subject to your Homeowners ' Deductible . The coverage may also be limited to a specific dollar amount per piece . If you do have jewelry or other higher value items that you are concerned about , it is best to talk to you insurance professional about `` scheduling '' those items for coverage either on a homeowners ' `` rider '' or as a separate policy all together . There are a couple of advantages to this . First , the item will be covered to it 's appraised value as opposed to some significantly smaller amount . Second , when scheduled these items are usually then NOT subject to the homeowners ' deductible . Finally , in addition to the perils listed in the Homeowners policy , scheduled items are also covered for `` mysterious dissappearance '' which is much broader coverage . This means that there would be coverage even if the item was simply lost . If your diamond falls out of your engagement ring and the ring is scheduled , there would be coverage to replace the stone . There would be no such coverage under a standard Homeowners ' policy .
USAA renters insurance policies cover jewelry . However , like most renters coverage , there will be specific limits and exclusions regarding how much would be paid on a claim . With many policies , you can add riders to broaden your coverage or specifically schedule items of jewelry . Yourpersonalbroker or an experienced broker can review with you how to best cover any jewelry you have .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is It Ok To Have Two Health Insurances ?
There is no law preventing you from having two health insurance plans . Most people find that one plan is sufficient . Of this group the majority pay more in premiums than they receive back in benefits , so having two plans is very difficult to cost justify . Sometimes people with chronic medical conditions find having two plans make sense . But even in this group it makes sense only when employers are paying the majority of the premium . The second plan will only pick up and pay on the left over expenses : deductibles , co payments , or co insurance .
There is no advantage to having two insurance polices if you are insuring the same risk . Polices have a provision in them that states if there is another policy in force then they will only pay there portion . So all you end up doing is having two insurance companies paying half a claim . Now if the two companies are covering different portions of the same risk due to exclusions then your ok .
That is a great question ! You can , but the question is do you really want to ? In many cases , you will lose a substantial amount of the funds ' value by doing so , either through loss of unvested contributions , penalties , or from the income tax that is assessed . Those losses can be really steep , up to a third of the value of your fund . If you need to get your hands on some fast cash , try borrowing from your life insurance , or selling something before gutting your future , ok ? Please drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
One of two things happens at the end of the term of term life insurance depending on the contract . One is the policy simply cancels and nothing else will happen . Second are more common is you will experience a steep premium increase usually 7 to 10 times the price . Some policies allow you to convert to a permanent whole life plan but could be expensive or you can just purchase another term life insurance plan assuming your health is still OK .
For sure , it is a simple procedure . Call up your insurance company and ask for the right form . There you go . But : as with any major decision , you should first assemble a team of advisers and make sure all bases are covered the way they should be . You do not want this move to backfire on you . First of all , talk with the beneficiary of the policy . Once you cash it in , there will be no survivor benefit . Nothing . Is that OK ? Are you self-insuring with some other liquid funds ? Will the exact amount of money needed be there when it is needed ? All cash needs met ? Debts can be paid off ? How about money for the future ? Kids will be OK ? Grandkids ? Your business ? Charitable gifts taken care of ? Lots to think about before you wipe out the death benefit . Then talk with your insurance broker . Talk about the possibility of your getting coverage later , should you need it again . What would the pricing be like ? Of course , you should be given only the most general of answers . You will be older , so the price , of course , would be higher ... ... assuming that you are insurable . And your broker should make it clear in no uncertain terms that you may unfortunately not be eligible for coverage at a later point . You may have a serious medical condition . You may take up an adventurous hobby . You may have a job that requires travel to hazardous places . Any number of changes could take place that would disqualify you for coverage , or drive the price up . A lot . Dont forget that . Dont take your insurability for granted . It is not prudent to assume you will be able to easily pick up a cheap policy . You should also talk with your accountant or tax advisor . Depending on how you have funded your life insurance policy , all or a portion of the surrender value may be taxable . You need to know that before you accept the check . You do not want to get hit with an unexpected tax bill , especially if you have counted on all the money for a specific purpose . There you go . Surrendering your life insurance is as simple as completing a form . But it really is not so simple .
That is a great question ! There are a lot ! Simply put , there are two categories of annuities . One you plunk down your cash , and it immediately begins paying out your monthly payments , These are called `` immediate annuities '' . The other type takes your cash , and holds it , or `` defers '' the payments for a number of years before paying those monthly payouts . These are called `` deferred annuities '' . There are several different types of these , but again very simply , there are `` fixed annuities '' , that pay a set interest rate , there are `` indexed annuities '' , that pay interest rates that are based on the movements of a market , like the S&P 500 , or the Dow Jones . There are also `` variable annuities '' , that pay according to how well the investments within the annuity did -LRB- or did n't -RRB- do . That is a basic look at the types of annuities , I hope that helped . Please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more details , ok ? Thanks for asking !
Health insurance brokers are the smartest , kindest , coolest , nicest people in the world . OK ... maybe I am embellishing just a bit . An experienced health insurance broker -LRB- yes , I am one of them -RRB- can typically help you fund the lowest available rates for your healthcare . There is no charge -LRB- ever -RRB- when you use them and you are likely to save money , time and frustration by utilizing our services . With all of the recent changes in the US healthcare system , including the availability of federal tax subsidies , you always want to work with an experienced broker and their health insurance website . The cost is free and you 'll be able to easily find and compare your best options .
Medicare will pay for home health care by a Medicare certified home health agency -LRB- HHA -RRB- if four stipulations are met : 1 -RRB- You must be homebound , meaning that it is very taxing to leave home , and assistance of a person or equipment is needed to do so . Trips to the doctor are allowed , and short trips to church , barber , etc are OK as long as they are infrequent . 2 -RRB- You must need skilled care either intermittently -LRB- at least once every 60 days -RRB- or continually on a short term basis -LRB- daily for 3 weeks , more if needed but the need is finite -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Your doctor must sign a Medicare home health certification and plan of care . And 4 -RRB- You receive your care from a Medicare certified HHA .
This is really a question of what you prefer . An HMO describes a plan that pays it 's doctors and other providers a flat fee per patient . You must choose a primary care physician and they are responsible for your care . They usually do n't get to bill for their services , they have to make do with what they get . They will be your first call or visit and will manage your referrals and other care . They are usually part of a hospitals system and your inpatient care will be within that hospital system . You have less control over the providers you utilize than with a PPO . A PPO is n't really a health insurance plan , it 's a network of physicians , hospitals and other providers . Many health insurance companies may utilize a PPO to control their costs . This is a fee for service arrangement where the provider bills the company for your care and you must use the hospitals in the network to get your highest benefit level . You can usually chose your doctors and hospitals and you have more control than with an HMO . The health insurance companies save money by using a PPO because the providers have to agree to get paid on the PPO 's fee schedule to gain access to the patients . Historically , and HMO is less expensive than a plan using a PPO . This is because the HMO has more control over your care and they also have more control over a providers compensation . This is really a question of preference . If you 're OK with the HMO dictating where you go and who you see for your care , this would be a great option for you and you 'll probably save some money . However , If you 'd like to be the one to choose who you see for your care , you 'd probably be more comfortable with a PPO arrangement . Just realize that you 'll probably have to pay a little more for that freedom .
Some advantages of life insurance are : 1 . Being able to leave money to provide for those who would be financially hurt by the insured person 's death , 2 . Not having to wait years to save up this amount of money , 3 . Life insurance normally being exempt from income tax , 4 . Life insurance normally being able to bypass probate , 5 . Policy owners being able to choose their own beneficiaries , 6 . Beneficiaries being able to use the death benefit as they see fit . 7 . The versatility and availability of so many different policies to choose from . The disadvantages could be : 1 . Having so much life insurance that one does not have a good quality of life , when your beneficiary really wo n't need that much . 2 . Getting Life Insurance when what the clients really want is a potentially high paying investment , and they are OK with risk . 3 . Having to qualify for Life Insurance medically can be a disadvantage for those with poor health .
Great question ! The answer , probably not so much . Hopefully you have a dental coverage included , if you have the policy through your employer as most of the expenses will be billed as dental , and not health . If you have dental , you should be ok . If you do n't , some portion of the cost can be covered by your health insurance , but I would expect that most wo n't be . If that is the case , ask your dentist and oral surgeon if you can set up payment plans with them , so that the work is affordable . If you would like more help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , I do not have a very good answer for you . Insurance types are very specific in what they cover . Life insurance policies will not cover a trip to the dentist , and your vision policy wo n't cover your maternity costs . Unfortunately , your health insurance is n't going to do what a life insurance policy would have - cover those expenses . I 'm sorry , but I do appreciate you asking . If you need help , please inbox me , ok ?
State Farm agents do sell health insurance but it is not a State Farm product . The carrier has a marketing agreement with Assurant -LRB- Time -RRB- to offer their products in select states . In most states Assurant is not competitive and is making noise like it may not be around post 2014 when Obamacare kicks in . Just something to consider . Also , your SF agent may not understand the intricacies of health insurance and may fail to fully explain your options and how the plan works . Assurant is like most other carriers They have some OK policies and some that stink .
Usually it effects the uber upper classifications when applying for a policy . Your parents health history is factored into the super preferred class . Why ? good question . For a short period of time the aspect of genetic testing in regards to the purchase of life insurance was kicked around . The thought that through a genetic sample an insurance company could questimate the risk of certain illness and price accordingly . While on the surface this seemed OK , the underlying problem was as simple as pricing somebody who has the genetic marker for cancer who has never had cancer . If they never get cancer , which is always a possibility , were they fairly underwritten ? Genetic testing quickly was banned from life insurance testing . The asking about parents health history I believe , is one the few ways an insurance carrier can get as close to genetic testing as the law allows .
Your health insurance premium increased because your insurance company did not like you . OK ... Seriously , the increase was probably part of a broad increase that everyone probably received . As the cost of medical equipment , doctors fees , facility charges and other items increase , invariably , your rate will go up . Believe it or not , sometimes , yourrate can actually go down !
How do the Duggars afford health insurance ? How many children do they have ? 35 ? 100 ? 500 ? Ok ... maybe not that many , but it is a lot ! Although it 's just my opinion , Mr. Duggar seems to be a successful Realtor , which , I assume , provides an above-average salary . Also , prior to the creation of the show , the Duggars benefited by some successful real estate investments . And of course , there are the TV rights and revenue they receive , which could exceed $ 25,000 per episode . James , Justin , Joseph , Jennifer , Josie , Michael , Josh , Anna , Jana ... I have to stop . I 'm tired .
That is a great question ! Unfortunately , I 'd need a lot more information from you . There would need to be the simple things , like your age , gender , smoking preference , and health issues ; then we 'd have to decide whether you would even be able to purchase that much coverage , based upon your income . Then we 'd look at the reason for the insurance , and determine the best type of policy to do that . Then we could talk about price . If you 'd like to have that conversation , please feel free to inbox me , ok ? Thanks for asking !
You can purchase Long Term Care Insurance for your parents if they qualify health-wise , and consent to filling out the application and undergoing the exam . If they do qualify for the Long Term Care coverage , it is OK for a family member to assist with making policy premium payments .
What is to blame for the sharp increases in health insurance ? Well is it OK to say everybody ? We all have a hand in the cost of healthcare in this country . This is going to be why it will so hard to change our system or lower it 's costs . To do so , requires everybody to do something and the problem is everybody has a solution that leaves them untouched and hammers the other guy . Just wo n't work that way .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
end question
start question
life-insurance
Where Can You Get Life Insurance ?
Life insurance is offered by life insurance companies through licensed agents . Most licensed agents are associated with insurance agencies . While each state requires agents to pass a proficiency examination or meet other requirements , there is no requirement for them to hold any specific designation . So , while you can buy life insurance from a variety of financial sellers , you should consider the agent 's experience , training and professional credentials .
If you dont want to have to hassle dealing with a life insurance agent , there are plenty of online portals and retail kiosks in malls that sell it . Some life insurance companies have gone the mobile app route with simplified issued policies to expedite the underwriting process . For a the personal approach you can always find earner beaver agents and registered representatives in agencies and broker dealers that have access to the full inventory of life insurance providers . One word of warning : stay away from agencies that promote their own product line . Its rarely the best deal .
First , take care of your risks - health insurance , car insurance , home/renters insurance , life insurance . Second , you need a stash of emergency cash . I make it rhyme so it 's easy to remember . $ 1,000 - $ 2,000 is a good start . Get a safe & start sticking it in there . Crap happens - someone in India wipes out your account and it takes a week or two to get the bank to give you back your money . Third , open a savings account and save at least three months of your household expenses but six months is better . Again , crap happens and if you have to change jobs , you may need a 3-6 month cushion to find another job . Fourth , max out your company 's 401k to the extent of the company matching . That means for every dollar you put in , you DOUBLE your money guaranteed . Fifth , this is where you get into long term financial planning . Do some networking , attend some seminars , ask friends . I personally like mutual funds & annuities but everyone will give you different answers . Find a plan that meets your risk tolerance and a company you trust . You will hear a lot of noise about fees but keep it in perspective - are you getting what you pay for ? It 's not like gasoline where you get the same gas no matter where you fill up so always look for the cheapest . Different products offer different services for different fees .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
Term life insurance is better in situations where you need a lot of coverage for a limited period of time , and want to pay the lowest possible premium . Permanent life insurance is better in situations where you need the policy to last a lifetime , where you want to pay off the policy early , or where you want cash value to borrow from .
This is a very important question , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace after January 1 , 2014 . Individual insurance carriers have revamped their products significantly to compete in this new environment and the consumer needs to be well informed when making their choice as the answer to your question will vary significantly from one insurance carrier 's products to another 's . As a general rule of thumb , you can be pretty comfortable that in a life threatening emergency your insurance coverage will apply outside of your home state . Where things can get confusing and possibly expensive is when a subscriber seeks non-emergency care outside of their home state or perhaps even outside of their plan 's service area within their home state . Before enrolling in a plan you need to know if it has moved to an HMO type of model where you may have little or no coverage outside of your plan 's service area -LRB- this could literally be an area encompassing several counties within your state -RRB- , whether the plan has gone to a gatekeeper model where a referral from your primary care physician is required for treatment to be covered at in-network levels , or whether your chosen carrier uses an open network model where you can access their provider network any where in the nation without a referral being required . My advice is to seek out the guidance of an experienced health insurance broker who understands how different health insurance carriers have structured their products and who can educate and guide you to the plan that best fits your needs . Please feel free to contact me for assistance in this regard .
It all depends . Life Insurance sales is a business opportunity . First , you are compensated for writing policies that get issued . If you were to go out and write 10 policies today that all got issued you would get paid . Second you can get a varying contract with the Insurance carrier . That means that some will pay 70,80 90 % of the first years premium as a commission to you . Third , depending on your contract , you can get renewals . For business that stays on the books after 13 months , you can get a commission from that too . Fourth , if you get into management you can get commissions from what your sales teams write . It is one of the few professions remaining today where you dont need a college degree to earn a six figure income . You need to learn your products , market to people who want/need your product and sell them what they need . There are many good companies you can work for to receive the training and support to build a very good career out of this .
There are several ways that a life insurance company can know or learn that you smoke -LRB- what you smoke was not specified but we 'll go for tobacco on this one -RRB- . 1 -RRB- Self Reporting - they ask you on your application if you are a tobacco user and , depending upon the value of the policy being applied for , may ask for fairly detailed information on your type and frequency of tobacco usage . So , to honestly complete the initial application the applicant themselves should be the person informing the insurance carrier about their tobacco use status . 2 -RRB- Physical Exam - as a condition of your application you may be required to get a basic physical examination where things like height & weight can be verified and where , quite often , blood and/or urine samples are also taken to screen for health issues and to detect drugs such as Nicotine in the applicant 's system . 3 -RRB- Electronic Medical Records - most life insurance carriers will check your application 's answers against information about you in the Medical Information Bureau . An indicated history of tobacco use when none is reported on the person 's application would be an underwriting red flag . Also , information about whether you have been issued life insurance as a smoker , declined or rated as a smoker on a life insurance application can also turn up . 4 -RRB- Leg Work - few of us will have this problem , but if you are applying for a really large amount of life insurance the insurance carriers may actually conduct investigations into an applicant 's background and medical history . These may include interviews with friends and family . So , if they figure out you are really a Mafia boss rather than the president of the local trash company , your application for $ 50 million in coverage may get turned down . To take out a life insurance policy as a non-smoker when you really are a smoker would be an act of fraud -LRB- a misrepresentation on the applicant 's part -RRB- . And even if you were to get issued at a non-smoker 's rates that does n't mean you are home free . Life insurance policies standardly have a two year contestability provision in them where the insurance company can terminate or adjust the policy if it can prove that you made any false statements on your application . But , if your misrepresentation about your tobacco use is determined to meet the legal requirements of fraud -LRB- pretty good chance they will -RRB- then the contestability period is indefinite .
That is a great question ! The first step is to decide exactly what your retirement looks like to you . Do you want to travel ? Hole up somewhere and fish all day ? Live basically as you do now ? Once you 've done that , take a look at where you are financially right now . What are your assets ? What debts do you have ? How much longer do you anticipate working ? Then you can figure out how to get from where you are , to where you need to be to ensure your retirement looks like you want it to . The rule of thumb is to live at the standard that you are now , you will need to save between 8-10 times your current salary . If you are n't comfortable now , then you will need to save even more . A good advisor can help you find a way to get started , or to adjust the plans that you have . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
That is my favorite question of the week , hands down ! What an excellent question ! The first place to start is to figure out where your money is going , and eliminate or cut back on those places where it does n't need to go . Maybe you find that you 're dining out 6 nights a week , and that it is a significant amount of your paycheck . Cut back on the number of nights , or go to less expensive places . Put together a budget , and stick to it . Take the money that you now find extra , and use it to create a stable financial foundation for yourself - create an emergency fund , pay down your debt , and start investing the rest . Once you 've created a stable platform to work from , you can be more aggressive with your long range financial plan . It will all start with knowing where your money is going , and how to make it go where you need it to , instead of where it is going now . Be the steward of your money , not its slave . Great question ! Thanks for asking !
You can have a renters policy for each rental unit you have . You could have a unit in the city where you work . You could have another in the country where you spend your weekend . You could have another in the mountains where you ski , hike and take vacations . If you want to take out two policies covering exactly the same thing expecting to get a double payment in the event of a claim , you might be subject to an investigation for fraud .
Can everyone get health insurance ? Well , soon we will find out in 2014 . The quesiton will be can we afford it ? Prior to Obamacare , health insurance was the domain of states to set the rules for insurance . Some states have very good consumer oriented insurance laws and others really do n't . I live in a state where anybody who wants health insurance can get it , granted you still have to pay for it , but you can get coverage . My state actually adopted the Clinton Plan and fixed it to where it works and works well . Obamacare will have a lesser impact in my state than others , because we already were doing many of the things in Obamacare .
That is a great question , and I 'm really glad that you did n't wait any longer to ask it ! The first step would be to meet with an advisor to look at where you stand financially right now . Once you 've looked at where you are , you want to decide where you want to be . What are your goals for retirement ? Travel ? Retirement home somewhere ? These kind of goals help determine how to set up a solid plan for you . Depending upon where you are financially , you may need to change some of the things that you are doing now . Current wisdom says to live in retirement at the standard you are now , it will require that you have saved 8-10 times your current salary . I would strongly advise that you find someone that you trust to start the process for you , and the sooner the better . If you would like to discuss this further , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to make some time for you . Thanks for asking !
Yes you can apply for life insurance online . The life insurance industry is going through a very trying transition right now . The average career life insurance agent right now is over 50 years of age and the total number of agents is quickly declining . This is happening because more people like you are looking for life insurance online . The important thing for anyone who is a just starting the life insurance process to consider is that your buying experience will certainly be very different if you buy life insurance online versus contacting a local agent . Not better or worse , but different . Thinking about how you prefer to do business may help you decide which route to take . Are you part of the connected generation ? If your average day includes texting and Skype or FaceTime you will be perfectly comfortable buying your life insurance online . Do n't be concerned that you will be stuck with some impersonal call center . There are plenty of great online insurance agents that provide personal service . The only difference between them and your local agent is that your communication will be via your smart phone , not in person . If you 're not into the latest technology and you feel that personal interaction requires a handshake , you probably wo n't be comfortable getting life insurance online . You may find the process cold and impersonal . Do n't worry . Even though they 're getting older , there are plenty of great local life insurance agents that will give you advice and personal service your way . Many of them still make house calls and transact business over your kitchen table . The most important thing is not where you get life insurance , it 's that you do get life insurance . Good luck to you whichever route you choose :-RRB-
You should get life insurance where you trust the agency , have a choice of products , can get good advice and customer service , and where you know you will be sold a solid policy that will stand the test of time . This can be in person or it can be online .
Life insurance is priced the same for everyone . You can not get a discount on life insurance , and the discount store mentality does not work well with life insurance . You need to work with a knowledgeable agent to get your cheapest price . Getting a low quote from someone who knows little about life insurance does not mean you will get that price . I feel that the best way to buy cheap life insurance is to use an agency who can take your health information and match you up with the company that has your best rates . Some , like mine , can be found online . But wherever you go , the place to buy cheap life insurance is where the agent is valuable .
The only answer I can provide is maybe , and it really depends upon your financial situation . You can drive with Public Liability and Property Damage -LRB- PLPD -RRB- insurance . This covers your liability to another party in the case of an accident . When you get sued for an accident , this is where the huge claims come into play and where most people ca n't for it out of pocket . Comprehensive and collision coverage cover damage to your own vehicle . This type of coverage is not required . Most people only carry PLPD on older cars , where it is cheaper to replace the car then it is to insure it -LRB- e.g. a winter car worth $ 1,200 -RRB- . Now , there are some contractual obligations that might require you to get comprehensive and collision insurance . An example of this is a car lease . The lessor will require full coverage and to be named as a loss payee . This way , in case its collateral is destroyed , it can recoup its financial investment . In summary , make sure you can afford replacing the car if you go with PLPD .
Great question ! The answer is kind of iffy though , as the average where you live may not be the average where I live . A good portion of the cost is based upon the area where you live , and the risks associated with it . I am prone to hurricanes in Houston , you may not be where you live . We also have more issues with flooding than you may have . Folks in California may have a higher fire threat . The cost will also vary with the choice for deductible amount , and amount of things to be insured . The best guess I can give you is that you should be able to insure your things for around $ 20 a month . -LRB- And that is strictly a budgeting estimate , not a quote ! -RRB- If you need more details , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
This is a bit more complicated than just considering when you should purchase LTC . Sure , the younger you are the less expensive it will be . Many companies are getting out of the business due to reserve requirements along with claim history . The question I tell people to consider is how to get the protection you need while getting the most value from the premium you are looking at spending . Example : Did you know that you could have Critical & Chronic Illness protection within your term life insurance or permanent policy ? Consider , you get the death benefit of course when you die but what happens leading up to this ... you are surviving a medical event that could financially devistate your family . Where will you get the funds to support the family , medical expenses , etc. ? How about from your Life Insurance policy . Instead of just getting one benefit , you can have access to 3 ... . Now that is what I call value . Please note that you accelerating the death benefit so when you die , the death benefit may be reduced . With some planning you can make sure you have the strategies to protect your family and their financial future . Long-Term care insurance is something that everyone is going to need sometime in their future . And there are several ways to get the protection you need . Be sure to look at all the options before signing up for any policy .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Has The Best Long Term Care Insurance ?
It is hard to say who has the best long term care insurance because each company has its own special features . What may be best for one person may not be best for another . In reality , less companies are carrying long term care insurance than in the past , and it is not hard to compare the features of 3 to 5 companies to see which has the best policy for you .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Long Term Care Insurance in Massachusetts can come from many different companies , and most of the companies that have survived the recent price adjustments are very good . The one that is best for one person , however , may not be best for another . There are some companies that have better pricing for couples , some that offer certain features at a better price than another , etc. . To find who has the best long term care insurance for you , contact a broker who sells long term care insurance in Massachusetts . That way you can see your top three companies and then choose the one that has your best price , the highest rating , or a blend between the two , if those two factors do not coincide .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
The best Long Term Care insurance for one person may not be the best Long Term Care policy for another . Look at the rating of the company and the features of the policies they offer , in addition to see if they are priced competitively , their history of rate increases , and whether they have had many complaints against them . Above all , it is helpful to contact a Long Term Care broker -LRB- may Life insurance brokers also sell Long Term Care insurance -RRB- to help you find the best Long Term Care policy for you .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Do People Have Life Insurance ?
People have life insurance so that their survivors are not excessively burdened upon their death . Whether it be from the relatives taking up a collection for the funeral , to a business losing money while trying to replace a key employee , life insurance takes away part of the sting of that loss . It makes the transition to life without that person more bearable , not having to worry about finances in the midst of their grief and the many details at hand . Many people see Life Insurance is a legacy , a sign of caring , that they can leave to their loved ones . And if they do n't see it that way , I worked in a funeral home for a few years , I have seen how their loved ones concur with that sentiment .
You have heard all the song titles that tell you that all you need is love . Yes , love is overwhelmingly the reason people buy life insurance . If you really didnt care about anyone else , and didnt care if anyone even remembered your name , you would never purchase life insurance voluntarily .
For most people , life insurance is purchased for the death benefit it provides to the beneficiary . You have to ask yourself , `` If I died today , would anyone be affected financially ? '' If the answer is yes ... you need life insurance . For a single person , it may be as simple as covering funeral , cremation or other end of life costs . For the main breadwinner in a family , it 's going to be needed to replace some or all of the lost income due to your death .
People have life insurance for more reasons than you might think . Of course , they have life insurance so that their loved ones would have something to pay the bills for at least a while , until they can get back on their feet . They have life insurance so their kids can grow up financially stable in spite of the emotional trauma of losing a parent . They buy it for business purposes ; to tide them over if a key employee dies ; to provide money for a son to purchase the business from Dad if Dad dies ; to pay the estate taxes . Life insurance is used to fund funerals , provide collateral for loans , and save up money for the policy holder 's dreams . Those are just some of the reasons people have life insurance .
There are as many different reasons for Life Insurance as there are people . Some of the common reasons include leaving something for your family , advancing charitable organization causes which you support and to pay off existing debts so as to not burden your family . Insurance covers the unexpected and can help a person to keep their own finances and use Insurance to cover expenses . Not everyone believes they need to have insurance so it must be an individual decision . However the cost of insurance is typically offset by the benefits it provides .
People have life insurance to protect others that depend on them , i.e. beneficaries : family members , business partners and charitable organizations . Most people have financial liabilities , future obligations and some charitable intent . Life insurance can provide the protection to service these realities in case of the death of the policy insured .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Let me expound on your question ... Why do n't people get car insurance , or life insurance or long-term-care insurance ? Some people may believe they 're invulnerable , or that they ca n't afford the coverage , or they simply do n't want to think about it . My suggestion to those people is to NOT think about the day that you 're purchasing insurance , but instead think about the day that you NEED the insurance . What will happen if there 's a cancer diagnosis and you have no health insurance ? Or if you pass away leaving your family without the ability to pay the rent or get the kids through college ? Bottom line : In my opinion , there is NO good reason why people do n't buy health insurance .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Once upon a time there was a very rich man . He owned a number of businesses which he had started himself and which he had built himself . Altogether , he employed close to 20,000 people . That means he created opportunities for 20,000 people to support their families and lead their own lives . He understood that he could never have built his business empire without the dedication , hard work , and loyalty of each and every one of those men and women . He took good care of them . He paid them well . Lots of bonuses , lots of benefits . He was very community-minded . He knew that no man , and no family , was an island unto itself . We need each other . We need each other in times of natural disasters , and human tragedy , and family distress . When people lose their job , or get sick , or maybe lose their home , they need a helping hand . He always made sure his hand was ready to give . He took it upon himself to help many , many people . He gave generously to community service organizations . He made sure that families who were suffering had the means to weather the storm and remain together . When people in need came to him , he helped them get back on to their own two feet . He was an extremely dedicated family man . He loved his wife dearly . He was always there for his children . Everything he did was really for them . He wanted them to have the best of everything . He especially wanted his son and daughter to have a great jump-start in life . His entire estate the houses , the businesses , the valuables - was going to go to them when he passed away . One day he had a lunch meeting with his friend who was an estate planning attorney . His friend made the following observation : You know , you are quite a person . You have done such a tremendous job building a life for yourself . All the people you employ , all the people you help . How fortunate your family is to have you as a provider . But heres the problem : God forbid you die tomorrow , this entire wonderful world you have built collapses . Without you and your broad shoulders , the entire enterprise stops in its tracks . You can imagine that our friend the Rich Man didnt like hearing that at all . He had indeed put so much of himself into what he held to be precious . It would almost be an act of betrayal for them to lose it all when he died . I mean , shouldnt he make provisions for their care after his death ? Why shouldnt the show go on ? So many people have become dependent on him . So , he bought a bunch of life insurance . Life insurance to make sure his family wouldnt have to sell half his assets just to pay the governments estate tax bill . They wouldnt have to sell the residences or family jewels . The heirlooms could stay in the family . He bought life insurance to enable his businesses to keep running . People would be able to keep their jobs . Vendors would get paid . Clients would receive service . The management team would have enough money to keep going and growing . He bought life insurance to fill the coffers of charities doing noble work in his community . Hungry people could get fed . Homeless people could get shelter . Unemployed people get retrained for new jobs . Life insurance made it possible for the great work this man had been doing to continue . And because life insurance is such a great deal financially , the cost of this planning was literally pennies on the dollar . Each dollar of life insurance benefit literally cost him a few cents . Of course , it was this financial wisdom and eagerness to take advantage of a great deal that made him rich in the first place :-RRB- Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Lets suppose you own a business . Obviously you cant do everything yourself , so you need to hire people with special skills . Collectively you can get to where you want to go . The people with special skills might include a high-ranking executive . Might also include a highly skilled technician . Perhaps a top salesman . All these people play roles that are key to the operation . And you , as the entrepreneur of the enterprise , are very much a key person too . This is not to say that people who are not key do not bring value to the company and are not important . If all the business needed was key people , why would you hire anybody else ? But key people are the ones whose loss would create the biggest problems . Sales could go down . Vendors might not get paid . Clients might get nervous about orders being filled . Banks might think twice about lending money . You need to protect your business against the loss of these people . If any or all of them disappeared tomorrow , you need to be sure that your business can go full speed ahead . Employees , clients , prospects , vendors , lenders , investors , and everyone else related to your business , need to be reassured that business will take place as usual . And that takes money . If you have the exact amount of money you need exactly when you need it , then you could tell people to not worry . Orders will get filled . Bills will get paid . You can take the time needed to find the right replacement . And you dont want to have to set up an investment program to cover these people . Nor do you want to have to borrow the money . You want this coverage to come as cheaply as possible without any hoops to jump through . That is what life insurance does when it is purchased for key person coverage .
Well , what is the best major to have to be an insurance agent ? First let me qualify this by saying you do n't have to have a college degree to be an agent , nor is there really a major to become an insurance `` agent '' . You can do several business type majors that would work perfectly for working on the company side of insurance . Finance , computer science , math , accounting and so on would work for the company side . For the agent side ? A bit different . I guess I can tell you what my choices were from college . Originally a accounting/computer science major who in my 4th year decided to switch to marketing and industrial psych . The business background helped because when you are an agent you are in business for yourself and really by yourself . So understanding overhead , management , advertising are all pluses . However , I have the most mileage from the industrial psych classes . Industrial psych is workplace psych where you study why people do what they do at work . That education has helped me greatly as insurance sales as an agent really is about forming relationships and trust if you want a long term business relationship . Just remember no matter what you do , if you go into this business there will be people that love you and people that do n't . Try and focus on those who love you and let somebody else have those that do n't . Honestly there is enough to go around .
Typically ... YES ! Many people do n't realize it , but there 's pretty much always a need . You may be thinking `` I 've got my house and cars paid off , no other debts , and the kids are out of the house , so why do I still need life insurance ? '' When you 're in retirement , the 4 most common reasons why people have life insurance are income replacement , estate planning , burial expenses , and leaving a legacy behind . During your working life , structuring a combination of benefits -LRB- part of your coverage as term and part as permanent coverage -RRB- can be very beneficial because you 'll go into retirement knowing what checks you 'll be writing for your life insurance and can structure the premiums to remain fixed for life -LRB- or reducing the premiums/increasing the death benefit if you 've got a participating whole life policy -RRB- .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why do n't more people do n't buy long term care insurance ? Well mainly the reason is they do n't see a need because they have n't really thought about it . Speaking plainly people either `` get '' long term care or they do n't . I ca n't talk someone into purchasing coverage , but usually people come to me seeking long term care . Usually it is because they recently had a family member in a care situation and they simply do n't want that to happen to them . So it is a matter of putting together a plan that is affordable and covers the needs they want .
Why are so many people without Disability Insurance ? There are multiple reasons that people do n't have disability coverage . It could be they do n't see the value in owning a policy . It could be that their occupation does n't have a disability plan offered by a insurance company . It could be they ca n't get through the very hard underwriting that comes with disability insurance . There are multiple reasons people do n't have this coverage , too many to actually list here .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Does Renters Liability Insurance Cost ?
Renters insurance is typically one of the lowest cost insurances out there . Most renter will pay from $ 7/mo or up . The best thing to do is to have your auto and renters insurance with the same company . Most companies will offer you a discount by having both policies with them and in some cases the discount makes the renters insurance nearly free . Call your local agent today to find out what is available in your area and how affordable the coverage is .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
You may be required to purchase Renters Insurance . It depends if this is a requirement in your rental agreement or lease agreement . Some properties do require renters insurance to cover their interest . Renters Insurance also covers general liability and most leasing agency 's require a minimum of $ 100,000 in liability insurance . They do not care how much personal property you insure as long as the liability insurance is there . These policy 's can be very inexpensive especially for example if you buy the minimum policy $ 5.000 in personal property is usually the lowest you can buy , and $ 100,000 in liability for around $ 10.00 per month
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
When renting a home , the home owner needs to have Landlords Insurance to provide coverage for the Dwelling and Premises Liability . The renter needs to buy Renters Insurance to provide coverage for Personal Property & Family Liability . Although both the Landlords policy and the Renters policy are not required by law , it is advisable to be covered in the event of a claim . Many large property management companies and property owners do require tenants to purchase Renters Insurance as a condition to the Rental Agreement ; the reason for this is to avoid lengthy and cumbersome legal issues in the event of a claim attributable to negligence . For a small premium the Renters Insurance provides the tenant with Family Liability coverage which will offer defense and payout damages up to the policy limit . Liability coverage will offer protection for negligence that may lead to a claim -LRB- i.e. accidental fire , smoke , water damage etc. . . -RRB-
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Gym Memberships ?
Original Medicare does not cover gym memberships . Medicare Advantage Plans and some Medicare Supplements do ! This is one of the value added features of many Medicare Advantage Plans . If you want to be able to have a gym membership paid for look at the Medicare Advantage Plans in your ares .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- does not cover YMCA or gym membership . Some Medicare Supplements and Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- does provide gym memberships to their clients . SIlversneakers is a popular program offered by companies that sell Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplement Plans . When selecting a plan evaluate the premium you are paying with the benefits the plan provides , do not base your decision on whether they offer a gym membership . Premiums vary considerably between companies that offer these plans . You may save more than enough to buy a gym membership by purchasing a plan that does not offer one because the premium cost much less .
No . Medicare does not pay for YMCA or any other gym membership . However , SOME Medicare health insurance plans DO offer gym memberships as an extra perk . It is common with many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Medicare Part C -RRB- and some people who have original Medicare have a Silver Sneakers gym membership included in the price of their Medicare supplement .
Generally , the answer would be no . Aetna -LRB- or any other major medical carrier -RRB- does not cover gym memberships . There may be plans available that have add-on -LRB- non-insurance -RRB- benefits such as travel discounts or gym memberships , but a true major medical health insurance plan will usually not pay for routine gym memberships . In some instances a carrier may agree to pay for a gym membership if the individual needs a type of physical therapy -LRB- such as swimming -RRB- that is more economical than traditional therapy sessions .
Original Medicare does not cover gym memberships . Medicare Advantage Plans and some Medicare Supplements do ! This is one of the value added features of many Medicare Advantage Plans . If you want to be able to have a gym membership paid for look at the Medicare Advantage Plans in your ares .
Most likely , and technically , no it does not . In most allcases it is usually a Wellness Program that pays for a gym membership , and even then it is usually a reimbursement payment . But , there are some instances where an employer defined contribution plan or self-insured plan will pay for a gym membership or has a membership built into the benefits package .
If you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage Plan it will be much easier to find a plan that pays for Gym membership . Depending on the area you live in , Most Medicare Advantage Plans offers this benefit . I am not aware of an under 65 health plan that offers Gym membership although some may offer discounts .
I do not know any carrier that will in CA that will cover a gym membership . There are some carriers such as United HealthCare that will reimburse an insured for part of a gym membership based on how many times they attend . My suggestion is to check the carrier website to see if they have any discounts or reimbursements under wellness .
Medicare does not cover any type of gym membership , YMCA or otherwise . There are however some Medicare Advantage Plans that offer `` Silver Sneaker '' . Silver Sneakers will pay for your membership in the Y or some other facilities , depending on your area . The AARP United Healthcare Medicare Supplement also offers Silver Sneakers in some area 's .
Unfortunately , gym memberships are not covered by Medicare because they are not considered a medically necessary expense . However , there are some Medicare Advantage plans that can have some wellness programs and gym privileges covered . You would need to review each plan to find out if it provides that type of benefit in your area .
Medigap policies serve as a supplement to Original Medicare . Original medicare is an 80/20 plan , where Medicare pays 80 % of the approved charges . The beneficiary is typically responsible for the 20 % co-insurance as well as co-pays and deductibles that come with Medicare Parts A & B . The Medigap policy is designed to pick up the 20 % Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium payable to the carrier selected . The most comprehensive Medigap policy is Plan F , which covers all of the Part A & B deductible , co-insurance and co-pays , so when the beneficiary goes to receive care their is zero out-of-pocket costs . Some plans may also provide benefits like foreign travel as well as a gym membership as part of your regular plan . Please note : when purchasing a Medigap Policy , you need to add a Stand-Alone Prescription Drug Plan to satisfy your requirement as a Medicare Beneficiary to have Part D - Prescription Drug Coverage met .
Medicare does not cover exercise equipment , however if you have medicare part a and part b you could possibly get a medicare advantage plan which they provide a free gym membership . There are many benefits you could receive and i believe the best thing to do is speak to a medicare specialist .
There are specific health insurance policies -LRB- often HMOs -RRB- that will partially reimburse you for gym memberships . They will also reimburse you for portions of your YMCA or JCC memberships along with other fitness classes . It 's best to check with the individual carrier for specific details or your broker that may be aware of the company 's policy .
An individual health insurance plan is generally not going to pay for your gym membership . However , they may offer certain wellness programs for you to be active and continue your good health . Some plans may offer a discount on memberships of facilities the carrier has an association/contract with . You will need to review your specific plan or contact your agent/the carrier to find out what programs , if any , are available . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Each health plan spells out what they cover and what they exclude . Even if your health plan does not explicitly cover a gym or health club membership , they may provide `` wellness benefits '' which could pay a portion of the cost . You could also check with some of the facilities in your area and ask them if they are part of a network that might provide a discount .
Depending on where you live , the network in your area , and your personal situation Medicare Advantage Plans can be an attractive option . Unlike Original Medicare , Medicare Advantage Plans have a maximum out of pocket that you would pay for healthcare potentially saving you 10 's of thousands of dollars if you have a serious health issue . Most plans have the prescription drug plan included saving you money on premiums . Many also offer extra benefits such as gym membership , dental , and vision . Many Medicare Advantage plans have $ 0 to very low premiums making them a very attractive option for those on a budget .
There may be some plans that offer discounts on weight loss programs or gym memberships but generally your health will not cover a weight loss program you purchase over the counter . Every health insurance plan is different however and may offer at least some type of coverage depending on the weight loss program , is it medically necessary and prescribed by the doctor . Check with your agent to see what your policy covers .
Depending on what you consider a `` program '' ... Maybe . It will cover your doctors visit where the Dr. can run a risk assesment and go over a program to help address one 's individual body issues . If you were wondering if health insurance would cover a gym membership and a physical trainer then no , although both employers and insurance companies are increasingly offering those services at discounted prices for their employees/policy holders -LRB- increasing the focus and development of preventive , proacitve ways to eliminate serious health issues before they develop or worsen -RRB- .
I 've had my hands on well over 10K individual health insurance plans in the past ten years and I 've never seen one that will pay for a personal trainer . I have seen group plans that will subsidize or discount gym memberships though . Using a trainer to get fit is an excellent idea , but you 'll probably end up paying for it out of your own pocket . Have fun working out .
Many plans -LRB- but not every single one -RRB- provide some type of incentive for members to actively exercise . Wellness programs are becoming more prevalent as plans seek to keep claims experience lower by promoting healthy lifestyles . There may be some form of direct compensation to offset a portion of your annual membership costs . There may also be benefits tied to the number of times the facility is used over the course of the plan year . Many gym utilize swipe cards for entry that facilitate usage reporting .
end question
start question
annuities
Where To Buy Secondary Market Annuities ?
Not sure if you are still on this forum but we sell Secondary Market Annuities . However , we only sell to licensed agents . That said , I have plenty of preferred agents who work with us that can offer our product . If you would like to learn more or if you still have questions please let me know . 971-245-3425 Tyson Wright
Secondary market annuities offer fixed term payment streams from top quality insurance carriers . The high quality creditworthiness of the insurance carriers usually translates to lower returns to the investor , however secondary market annuities come with yields one to four percent higher than comparable assets . The term secondary market annuity has become an industry standard referring to a factored structured settlement , previously owned annuity or in-force annuity . Secondary market annuities offer all the benefits of the primary market , period certain , guaranteed yield annuity.Simply put , secondary market annuities offer higher returns without additional risk . Hope this Helps Tyson Wright SMA Hub , Inc. .
Secondary Market Annuities are lifetime or annuitized annuities that are sold generally for a lump sum payout for the annuity owner who needs cash in bulk and not in payments because of an economic challenge they may be facing . The secondary market makes claim of higher yields for income replacement , but is no guarantee to do so .
Lesson One A Simple Lesson on How the S&P 500 Works -LRB- Since the AP Has No Clue -RRB- Oct. 4 , 2010 4:34 AM ET | 15 comments | About : SPDR S&P 500 Trust ETF -LRB- SPY -RRB- , IVV , VOO , SSO , SH , SDS For More Info contact I came across this disaster of a story from the Associated Press yesterday : `` Apple May Surpass Exxon As Most Valuable Company . '' Interesting - Apple -LRB- AAPL -RRB- is a monster - but I did n't expect the AP -LRB- that 's Associated Press , not to be confused with AAPL -RRB- to attempt to mis-educate their vast audience with this blatantly false nonsense that shows a thorough lack of understanding of how the SPX works : While Apple CEO Steve Jobs will no doubt be happy about his new perch atop the business world , there 's more at stake here than mere bragging rights . As soon as the total value of the company 's shares edges above Exxon 's , Apple will take over the top spot in the Standard and Poor 's 500 , the market index used by most professional money managers . That means that billions of dollars invested in funds that track the index will have to shift their holdings to reflect Apple 's new weighting . Exxon , meanwhile , may see its share price fall from the same effect . That slide could be accelerated by hedge funds and technical traders who make bets based on the rebalancing of major indexes and would be primed to short the shares of Exxon . '' Reminder : The S&P 500 is a market cap weighted index . That means that larger companies have a higher weight in the index . An S&P 500 index fund will own a certain percentage of the outstanding shares of each company . It does n't take a market expert to understand that when Apple 's share price rises , and its market cap rises , its value in your S&P 500 portfolio also rises ! As an S&P indexer , you do n't have to do a thing . Changes in market cap based on share price movement are automatically self adjusting - after all , market cap = share price x shares outstanding . On a quarterly basis , the S&P 500 rebalances its index based on new share issuance and buybacks -LRB- in other words , changes in shares outstanding -RRB- . For example , when Exxon -LRB- XOM -RRB- buys back shares , S&P 500 indexers will need to sell shares of XOM . If XOM does a secondary offering , indexers will need to buy shares of XOM . So if you own one you need to relax it corrects automatic so you need not worry .
If you are talking about being covered by group health insurance and also covered by Medicare then it will depend upon the size of the employer group you are working for . If your employer has less than20 employees then Medicare is the primary payer -LRB- pays first -RRB- and the group health insurance pays in a secondary capacity . If your employer has more than 20 + employees then the group health insurance plan pays first and Medicare pays in a secondary capacity . This is the simplest and generally most common scenarios where this question comes up . However , there are numerous other situations a person may be in -LRB- eligible for Medicare and Medicaid , disabled , retired and still covered under a former employer 's plan , etc. -RRB- where other primary vs. secondary payer rules come into play that are too numerous to go into here . For more detailed information I would recommend that you go to Medicare.gov as they are an excellent resource for detailed information on the entire range of these issues .
Asking how you need to be good at selling Life Insurance is liable to get you a different answer from everyone you ask who has been in the business for any length of time . First , you have to understand that you do not Sell Life Insurance but rather Market Life Insurance . Second , you have to be able to understand how relationships work . Be involved in peoples lives at some level . Let people know what you do and how you can help them . Stay in front of the groups you want to market to . Product is secondary here . Without someone to work with , product does not matter . Learn your market and identify the products which will solve the need .
There is a secondary market that will buy and sell existing life insurance policies . The test of insurable interest only exists at the inception of the policy . If you buy a policy on the life of someone you do not know , your interest would be speculative , trusting that the insured would die sooner rather than later .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
At one time it was a common form of gambling to take out an insurance policy , particularly on a sailor , just before he ships out on a journey . That is not possible any longer ; however , there is a secondary market of life insurance policies where the owner of an insurance policy can sell it to a third party who hasnt an insurable interest . It is usually done to secure cash to pay medical bills of a terminally ill person .
There are specific situations where Medicare is secondary to a primary coverage plan . The most common one is when you , or your spouse , are covered under an employer group health insurance plan and that employer has 20 or more full time employees . The group plan is primary , Medicare secondary . The two plans coordinate . In most cases Medicare will pay little or nothing .
In most cases , Medicare is primary and COBRA is secondary . But there are situations where your COBRA plan would be primary . If you are on Medicare as a result of ESRD -LRB- end stage renal disease -RRB- the role is reversed and COBRA is primary , Medicare secondary . You can review the Medicare publication `` Who Pays First '' for more detail .
Term Life Insurance has no cash value . But some term life insurance policies allow the policy owner to purchase a return of premium rider that can refund the premiums paid at the end of the term life insurance contract . There is also a secondary life settlement market for term contracts with conversion provisions for older policy insureds that may have value in the settlement market .
For most persons , Medicare is your primary insurance . That means it is your coverage that pays first , up to the limits of benefits you have . If there are additional expenses that Medicare does not cover , you can have a secondary carrier that will pay some of those expenses . It is also possible for Medicare to be a secondary carrier . One example would be in specific instances where your employer -LRB- or spouse 's employer -RRB- provides healthcare coverage . Then , that coverage would pay first .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
No , Medicare is not always primary . If you are still working and have group coverage then Medicare could be secondary . If your employer has more than 20 employees then your Medicare would be secondary . In most cases , however , Medicare is primary . If you have a Medicare supplement , the supplement is secondary .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA Benefits . One plan will be a secondary payer . Since the Veterans Administration benefits must be used at VA facilities , usually Medicare is secondary to the VA insurance . However , sometimes VA drug benefits are a good supplemental plan to Medicare , and thus becomes the secondary payer .
A secondary beneficiary for life insurance is also called a contingent beneficiary . A secondary beneficiary is not the same as being the second primary beneficiary listed . If there is more than one primary beneficiary , the death benefit is split among the primary beneficiaries . A secondary , or contingent , beneficiary only receives the death benefit if all primary beneficiaries are deceased .
By `` dual health insurance '' I will assume you are referring to a situation where a husband and wife each hold jobs with different companies and both jobs offer health insurance . Dual coverage almost always is a waste of money . Health insurance has a COB -LRB- coordination of benefits -RRB- clause that is designed to prevent overpayment . When a claim is submitted each carrier decides who is primary and that carrier pays first . The secondary carrier then reviews the claim and pays their portion if there is any liability . More often than not the secondary carrier pays little or nothing but between the two they will not pay more than 100 % of the claim amount . In other words , you will not `` profit '' on the claim and COB often is a delay and hassle .
Not sure if you are still on this forum but we sell Secondary Market Annuities . However , we only sell to licensed agents . That said , I have plenty of preferred agents who work with us that can offer our product . If you would like to learn more or if you still have questions please let me know . 971-245-3425 Tyson Wright
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is My Medicare Part B Premium ?
For most people , your Medicare Part B premium is $ 105 per month and is normally deducted from your Social Security benefit payment . If you are considered a `` high income '' individual your Medicare Part B premium will be higher . The same is true for your Medicare Part D premium . If you are not receiving SS benefits Medicare will bill you on a quarterly basis .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medicare Part A is typically $ 0 as long as you met your 40 quarters -LRB- or 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes -LRB- Medicare taxes -RRB- . If you have not met that requirement , the monthly premium is up to $ 426 per month . For 2014 , the premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 . This can change each year and is based on your modified adjusted gross income on your tax return from 2 years prior . You may also face a high-income premium penalty on your Part B coverage . The $ 104.90 premium is for those with incomes of $ 85,000 or less , if filing an individual tax return , and $ 170,000 , if filing a joint tax return . If your income was between $ 85,000 and $ 107,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 170,000 and $ 214,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 146.90 . If your income was between $ 107,000 and $ 160,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 214,000 and $ 320,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 209.80 . If your income was between $ 160,000 and $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 320,000 and $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 272.70 . If your income was above $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 335.70 . You can encounter other expenses as well such as the Part A and Part B deductibles and late enrollment penalties for not enrolling in Part B when you were first eligible for Medicare . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You 're generally responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can greatly help establish a predictable expense structure - essential for individuals on a fixed income in retirement . It will limit the amount of cost you 're susceptible to in the event of an illness or injury .
Most eligible retirees do not pay a premium for Medicare Part A . Once you have accumulated 40 Social Security credits -LRB- that means you have paid Social Security employment taxes for 40 or more quarters -RRB- you do not have to pay a Medicare Part A premium . Most eligible retirees pay a monthly premium of $ 104.90 for Medicare Part B for 2014 . This premium is however more for higher income individuals/couples . A premium chart is available on Medicare.gov . A typical stand alone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan will cost around $ 30 per month . Each of these parts of Medicare -LRB- A , B , and D -RRB- have deductibles and co-payments/co-insurance ; all details are available on Medicare.gov . Retirees often purchase a Medicare supplement insurance policy for an additional premium to provide coverage for Medicare Part A and B deductibles and co-insurance , or enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- to package and control costs of Medicare coverage . The average annual out of pocket cost per Medicare beneficiary per the most recent data is $ 4,600 per year . Any individual 's `` cost '' of Medicare will ultimately vary based upon their unique attributes and circumstances ; but to understand the variables and get some control over costs it isadvisableto meet with alicensed insurance agent/advisor who specializes in the senior/Medicare market .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Chimney Repair ?
Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . A homeowners policy will provide coverage to repair or replace your home and it 's parts so long as they are damaged by what is refered to as a `` Covered Peril '' . In other words , if the damage is a direct result of causes that are listed in your policy , then the policy coverage would apply . Naturally , any coverage settlement would be subject to your policy deductible .
It may depending on the circumstances that caused the chimney to need repair in the first place . If homeonwers policy does provide coverage for the claim it may be subject to the policy deductible . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Your chimney is part of your house and there fore is covered for many possible claims including fire . Theft is also included although admittedly , in my 32 years of experience as a premier broker , I have yet to see anyclientreport there chimney missing or stolen . Keep in mind that wear and tear of an aged chimney is not covered .
A chimney is part of a house . The company knows that your house has a chimney . If the chimney is damaged by a specified peril -LRB- i.e. windstorm -RRB- you can expect coverage . The recovery will be reduced by the deductible . Damage that is the result of wear and tear will not be covered ; it must be a specified peril as named in your policy .
A cracked chimney liner may be covered under your homeowner 's insurance if it was due to a covered peril , such as fire , theft -LRB- OK ... Nobody would want to steal it -RRB- or vandalism . However , wear and tear , along with depreciation , are not covered . So if a claim is submitted for that reason , it will not be paid .
Depending on what the damage is , the chimney may be covered . Most homeowners policies will cover the damage if caused by fire , wind , hail , smoke , explosion , vandalism , falling objects and collision . However if the damage is just caused by normal wear and tear then this would not be a covered peril of your policy .
It may depending on the circumstances that caused the chimney to need repair in the first place . If homeonwers policy does provide coverage for the claim it may be subject to the policy deductible . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If the crack in the chimney liner was caused by a covered loss and the crack is a detriment to the safety of the residents or adversely affects the property it may be covered . Every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be .
There are several things to consider when looking for ways to lower your Home Insurance premiums . The first area I would call loss control . take a look at your home and property . Are there tree branches or shrubbery that should be trimmed to allow mor air flow around your home ? This cuts down on moisture build up that can cause damage . Are the steps and planking on your deck clean , secure and free from any damage ? Have you had your fireplace chimney cleaned regularly ? Things like these and more when managed , can reduce the chances of a claim which can increase your rates . The next area would be bundling . Many companies offer very nice discounts for those who insure their cars and have life insurance with the same company as your home . Next , talk to your insurance professional about increasing yuour deductible and while you are at it , what benefits you might earn from installing a monitored alarm system , putting on a new roof or upgrading your plumbing , electrical or HVAC sytems . There are discounts available , for sure .
Air Conditioning Units are covered under Homeowners Insurance policies for the perils afforded against by the policy ; i.e. Fire , Wind , Hail , Vandalism etc. . . If the question is regarding repairs and maintenance , the unit would be covered either by a Manufacturer 's Service Contract or a Home Warranty Policy and not your Home Insurance Policy . Homeowners Insurance is designed to protect the home against covered perils to assist the homeowner from financial loss ; it is not designed as a repairs and warranty policy for appliances and general upkeep . Home Warranty policies are available for appliances and repairs of systems in homes ; the homeowner would have to pay a premium for the warranty policy and each service visit would be covered after a deductible which would be agreed upon on the policy .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
If a fallen tree , whether your own or your neighbors , has landed in your yard , on car or on your home , you are likely wondering whether your current homeowners insurance policy will cover the repair costs . Damage to your home and its contents , regardless of whether the trees origin was from your own property or a neighboring , is covered under a homeowners policy . For property such as sheds , additions or detached garages , there is generally a maximum amount of coverage offered for fallen tree damage -LRB- i.e. 10 % of your entire propertys value -RRB- . Even though your homeowners insurance policy will cover damage resulting from fallen trees , it is important to keep in mind that you are financially responsible for any applicable policy deductible . For example , if your homeowners insurance policy has a $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 deductible and the total cost of repairs is $ 25,000 , you will be required to pay either $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 out of pocket for the clean-up to be completed . If the fallen tree was from your neighbors yard , it is possible that your insurance company will attempt to get their policy to cover the cost of the damage . In this event , you may be refunded any deductible you paid for the repairs .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
What does life insurance do ? That is a great question . Auto insurance pays to repair your car , home insurance pays to repair your home , health insurance pays to repair your health . But life insurance does not pay to repair your life . Rather , life insurance pays when death occurs . It 's purpose is to `` repair '' some of the financial damage that is incurred upon the death of a loved one and/or provider . That is not all life insurance does - there are many reasons that people purchase life insurance . But it is the basic purpose .
All homeowners policies cover claims that result in the damage or destruction of covered property do to accidents . Your home policy does cover the damage to your home and personal property due to your furnace . But remember , the claim will not cover the repair or replacement of the furnace itself . Home insurance is not a repair and maintenance insurance . It only covers damage to your property as the result of an accident and will not cover the replacement or repair of items in your home . If you have any other questions about this subject please feel free to call me .
When you asked the question `` Does Homeowners Insurance cover driveway repair , '' ? It all depends on what caused the damage . It will not cover any repairs due to normal aging process . If your driveway is part of the main structure and the house was burnt down and needed to be rebuilt then the driveway may rebuilt . Just because your driveway is old and you need it repaired may not be cover . The key thing to remember is what caused the damage ? normal aging process or a covered peril ?
Homeowners insurance does not cover the death of the owner . Homeowner 's insurance protects the homeowner from sudden losses relating to the structure itself . Life insurance covers the death of the homeowner . Benefits are paid to the policyholders designated beneficiaries . Often the homeowner is also the primary breadwinner , and that income is needed to continue making mortgage payments , and repairs to the property .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Home Insurance may cover appliances in home ; there are 2 types of appliances , those that are fitted and those that are free standing . Fitted appliances constitute part of the Dwelling Coverage on the home insurance policy , whereas , free standing appliances may be covered under the Personal Property Coverage on the home insurance policy . The perils covered under a home insurance policy must be reviewed regarding the damage to the appliances . For example , Fire , Smoke , Lightning & Water damage may be covered on the policy which would also carry forward to the appliances . Regarding free standing appliances , the policy must afford coverage for Personal Property . If this question was intended for the reason of upkeep and maintenance of appliances , home insurance policies are not intended to repair or replace appliances due to maintenance and/or breakdown . Home insurance is intended for sudden and accidental losses which could cause financial hardship to the homeowner . If you wish to cover your appliances , you may wish topurchase a Home Warranty Contract from a small handful of carriers who offer a maintenance contract ; in this case , you will pay an annual premium as well as a Service Charge for each call when a repair company is dispatched to take care of a covered maintenance situation . If your question was indeed regarding perils covered on a homeowners policy , you may wish to contact your local agent and review the coverage on your policy or WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your coverage for you at no charge .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is Ipa Health Insurance ?
An IPA is an `` Independent Practice Association '' ... a group or association of doctors within a geographic region . So if you have a health plan through a specific IPA , it 's an HMO in that you receive all your care within that IPA and you generally have a PCP -LRB- primary care physician -RRB- . If you pick an IPA , make sure you 're happy with your primary doctor -LRB- although you can change primaries -RRB- and be sure there are lots of speciliasts in the group , PLUS ... check the list of hospitals in the IPA to be sure you 're comfortable with those that are included .
An IPA is an `` Independent Practice Association '' ... a group or association of doctors within a geographic region . So if you have a health plan through a specific IPA , it 's an HMO in that you receive all your care within that IPA and you generally have a PCP -LRB- primary care physician -RRB- . If you pick an IPA , make sure you 're happy with your primary doctor -LRB- although you can change primaries -RRB- and be sure there are lots of speciliasts in the group , PLUS ... check the list of hospitals in the IPA to be sure you 're comfortable with those that are included .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
It will depend upon what level of health insurance you purchase . Assuming you purchase major medical health insurance , it will now have to be in compliance with the Affordable Care Act . That said , what you may be purchasing can range from a `` Platinum '' level plan with very low out-of-pocket expenses for virtually all areas of health care to a `` Bronze '' plan that may not provide you any coverage at all until you have paid for more than $ 6000 in health care expenses out of your own pocket . One thing that is consistent across the four levels of health insurance plans now available -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum -RRB- is that a wide range of preventive health care services will be covered at 100 % with no cost sharing by the subscriber . Yes , you are also buying `` peace of mind '' that in the event of a serious illness or injury that your personal financial exposure is limited to that $ 6000 + number each year -LRB- which will increase in future years -RRB- and you also are now buying guaranteed access to health insurance with no pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . In the abstract I think everyone agrees that these are good things . However , depending upon your income level what you may be buying may or may not be viewed by the individual as affordable to them . Having recently completed the first open enrollment season under ObamaCare it has surprised me how many people , even ones qualifying for substantial subsidies of their monthly health insurance premiums , still elected to remain uninsured . Clearly , the perceived value proposition of what you get from buying health insurance has a very subject answer that varies greatly from one person to the next .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
I could write you a sizable book on the subject . If you could give me some insight as to what you would like to know more about ... - Individual or Group Health Insurance ? - All plans , configurations , and policies that are primarily intended to help manage/cover health expenses ? - How Health Insurance Companies operate ? - What makes a Medical Provider In or Out of your Network ? - What is a Network ? - Health Insurance Exchanges ? ... etc. . . My ability to be able to respond with a thorough , clear , and concise answer will correlate directly with your ability to specify exactly what type of information you are interested in .
Health insurance for small businesses works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you will need to consult with an experienced health insurance broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help -LRB- we can help you get your company 's group health insurance set up -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level plan -LRB- approximately 70 % coverage level and the most common plan design purchased -RRB- was $ 328 per month . This cost , in the overwhelming number of cases , will increase for 2015 plan year rates . As this is a national average figure and health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state , between regions within a state , and between different insurance carriers , it is only the roughest approximation of what health insurance might cost you . Your age and tobacco use status , plus the health insurance plan and insurance carrier you select are the primary factors in determining what your specific individual health insurance rates will be . Finally , whether or not you fall within the income ranges where you would qualify for some degree of an advanced premium tax subsidy will also factor into what your final monthly cost for individual health insurance would be .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
Health Insurance is a Privilege ; it is a privilege to have #healthinsurance which is a benefit in many ways . If an insurance company insures a person in return for a premium paid , the insured person now has the benefit of lower health costs due to agreed upon health tariffs negotiated between the insurance carriers and health providers , in addition , the insured person will only be responsible for a portion of the now lower fees for health services received . In areas of socialized health care , the Government or Employers may be paying the premiums for the same benefits explained above . The outcome is always better when everyone is insured since it lowers the overall ` risk ' taken by the insurance companies ; with better health care , comes better health , lower risk , lower premium and a greater public awareness of the ability to promote better health care options . For more information regarding Health Insurance , you may visit : WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Do Home Insurance Deductibles Work ?
The deductible in a homeowners insurance policy will represent the amount you the insured will pay in a covered loss . In other words you the insured are self insuring part of the loss which is the deductible amount you have chosen . For example if you have a $ 2,500 deductible on your homeowners insurance and your house is damage by fire -LRB- which is a covered loss -RRB- , then you the insured would be responsible for the first $ 2,500 in damages and the insurance company would pay the rest of the damage up to the policy limit .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
The answer to this question is based entirely upon the carrier and the state . Most carriers offer a range of deductibles from $ 500 - $ 5000 . If you own a high end home , the deductibles offered can be in the $ 10,000 - $ 50,000 range . Another type of deductible you may see is a separate wind/hail deductible . Originally , these deductible were found on homes in the hurricane belt , but in recent years , the South & Midwest have resorted to this deductible due to the number of tornados , high straight-line winds & hail claims . Often , the wind/hail deductible is shown as a percentage of the replacement cost of the home . For example , a 5 % wind/hail deductible on a $ 400,000 home would be $ 20,000 . Other separate deductibles for other causes of loss might be earthquake & flood .
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
Home owners insurance is needed because of the mortgage . Any lending company wants to protect their investment -LRB- mortgage -RRB- if something happens to the person who owns the home . Think about it for a second if your lending someone 200,000 to buy a house and the house floods or burns down than you could lose your money . Bottom line it 's all about protection assets . The real question is if you have home owners insurance when is the last time you used your deductible . If you have n't used your deductible in years than you should review how much your paying . If you have a low deductible than your paying too much , switch to a high deductible get savings and put that money towards paying off debt or increasing your savings . This works as long as you have not needed to use your deductible . Ask your self this , is that money better off in your pocket or the insurance company ?
The first thing I recommend looking for is appropriate coverage . Your homeowners insurance should have enough dwelling coverage to cover not only the cost of rebuilding your home , but also cover the clearing and removal of debris is your home is destroyed . All too often , I see homeowners policies that ONLY cover the cost to rebuild . If you do n't have enough to clear the debris , you could get stuck with that cost yourself -LRB- and that cost is in the neighborhood of $ 30,000 ! -RRB- . If the cost to rebuild your home becomes MORE than your coverage , is there anything in place to help pay for that ? For example , Farmers Insurance will include an extra 25 % of the dwelling coverage . So , if your home coverage is $ 100,000 , and it ends up cost $ 125,000 to rebuild your home , Farmers Insurance would pay that amount -LRB- minus your home deductible -RRB- . The final thing I would point out would be the deductible . In many cases , if you have never had a claim , you can have a lower deductible . However , many insurance companies are moving to a higher deductible model -LRB- usually as a percentage of the dwelling coverage -RRB- . So , if your dwelling coverage is $ 200,000 , your deductible would be 1 % of the dwelling , or $ 2,000 . I recommend finding a company that offers a deductible you feel comfortable paying .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
Life insurance does not have a deductible , how ever you should look at your deductibles to see where you can save money to increase you savings . If you have home owners insurance Look at the difference of having a low deductible and a high deductible . You will be shocked at how much money you can save . Now this works with someone who has n't used their deductible in years . The question I have for you , Is that money better off in my pocket or the insurance company ?
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
How much home insurance do you want ? Do you want a policy for a home loan closing that meets the lender 's miniumum requirements ? Do you want to insure a home for what its market value is ? Do you want to insure your home for what it will cost to rebuild it and the necessary costs for debris removal , architectural fees , permits , building code upgrades ? The bottom line is that a homeowners policy produced for a mortgage closing is a minor detail but a homeowners policy when your home is damaged is EVERYTHING . A conversation with an insurance professional will cover these topics relative to your wants to determine just how much coverage you need .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
The maximum amount of coverage carriers generally approve for a stay-at-home spouse -LRB- or even if they 're just temporarily unemployed -RRB- is going to be up to the face amount the working spouse has in place , regardless of whether it 's term or permanent coverage . A good way to figure out how much coverage is appropriate for a non-working spouse is what expenses would be incurred you need is what expenses would be incurred if the stay-at-home spouse passed away . This can be a wide range of things including the cost of daycare -LRB- if you have kids -RRB- , what it would cost to hire someone to do the services the stay-at-home spouse did during the day , funeral expenses , etc. . From there , you 'll want to look at how long do you need that coverage for ? Til the kids are out of the house ? til the house is paid off ? til you 're retired ? longer ? Perhaps you need a higher amount of coverage now and less coverage later . Many people often have a hard time finding the right balance point of amount of coverage and length of coverage . This is where working with an independent insurance agent can come in handy in helping you determine what insurance policy structure will be most suitable to cover the needs at hand . Send me a message if I can be of help .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
There are many factors when it comes to rating a homea home . From the type of home -LRB- Stick Frame to Log home -RRB- Also how far away you are from a fire department . Your credit plays a factor also . The age of the home and if you have had any prior losses . Also each carrier uses a different rating factor so the rates can be VERY different . Also you need to know if the policy is a replacement cost policy or actual cash value policy this also makes a difference . In Montana I have insured Log home worth $ 500,000 for as little as $ 1000 a year with full replacement cost and low deductibles But I also have insured a Stick frame home which was worth $ 200,000 for the same price with a different carrier . I have also seen homes work much more for even less for insurance . the best thing you can do is shop around it can be time consuming but you need to make sure that you are properly covered it is not always about the rate . almost 57 % of the home in the United States are under Insured in the event of a total loss you could be left with a hole in the ground and the bank paid off but no money to rebuild . It is very important to make sure that you understand your coverage and that you TRUST your agent .
The IRS does not look favorably on any personal insurance deductions such as car , home , boat , jewlery or fine art insurance or rental insurance . However , Renter 's Insurance Can be tax deductible if you operate a business out of your home . In order to claim the renters insurance as a valid deduction you must allocate a certain percentage of your home as your office space and that portion theirof is tax deductible as part of eligible expenses . If you do not own a business , you can not deduct your renter 's insurance
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does State Farm Renters Insurance Cover Flood ?
State Farm renter 's insurance does not cover flood . In fact , no renter 's insurance policy covers flood since it must be purchased separately . It is a specific risk that has been handled by a government agency in the past . If you are in a flood zone or are at risk for flood damage , you can speak to a broker about rates and policy information .
State Farm renter 's insurance does not cover flood . In fact , no renter 's insurance policy covers flood since it must be purchased separately . It is a specific risk that has been handled by a government agency in the past . If you are in a flood zone or are at risk for flood damage , you can speak to a broker about rates and policy information .
In Wisconsin Rural Mutual Insurance Company which is a part of Farm Bureau Financial Services offers renters insurance . I can only speak for Wisconsin , but Farm Bureau Financial Services does operate in other states within the United States and handles personal lines with other companies in those states . If you are in Wisconsin give me a call and I can try to help you with coverage if you are not in Wisconsin , then I would suggest contacting your local Farm Bureau office to ask them for a local agent .
Yes , State Farm does offer life insurance . However , I have some clients who bought State Farm life insurance and then ended up buying different policies because they were much less expensive . Shopping for life insurance with an independent agent like myself gives you access to over 70 A rated or better life insurance companies . Many of these life insurance companies offer policies less expensive than State Farm and they may be less restrictive when it comes to certain health conditions . If you use State Farm for your other insurance needs , I would highly recommend you shop your life insurance with an independent agent because you will most likely save a significant amount of money .
Yes , the Farm Bureau does offer life insurance . You can contact your state Farm Bureau to find an agent . Or you can get a quote via the internet from United Home Life , of whom the parent company is United Farm Family Life Insurance Co , which operates as a subsidiary of the Indiana Farm Bureau . UHL provides life insurance in most states .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
State Farm does have Disability Insurance that it offers for purchase . Their plans include regular Disability Insurance that pays a benefit to the disabled person to be used as they wish , which State Farm calls Disability Income Insurance . State Farm also offers Mortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance .
Yes , State Farm does offer Long Term Disability Insurance under the name , `` Disability Income Insurance '' . State Farm also offersMortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance . You would need to contact a State Farm agent to apply for this coverage .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
State Farm does not offer private Short Term Disability Insurance . At this time , the only carriers that I am aware of that offer that type of coverage are Mutual of Omaha and Assurity . State Farm does offer long term Disability Income Insurance , Mortgage Disability Income Insurance , Individual Credit Disability Insurance , and Group Disability Insurance .
State Farm does sell annuities in most states . Check with a local agent to make sure they are available in your state . To learn about State Farms annuity products go to their website WEBSITELINK It looks like they offer three products . Future Wealth Builder , Future Income Plus , and Guaranteed Income .
State Farm offers home insurance in most US states , but may not beselling new policies inevery state . For example , due to the risk of catastrophic claims costs from hurricanes , State Farm does not sell new home insurance policies in Florida.Contacta local State Farm agent , and they can let you know if State Farm home insuranceis available in your state .
State Farm offers an entire portfolio of insurance including Renters Insurance . Your State Farm agent can provide you with all the information needed . Be sure to consider paying for the insurance which will replace your `` stuff '' versus just paying you the value at the time of loss . There is a huge difference in what the insurance will pay out .
Standard renters ' insurance does not cover damage to property from flooding . A separate flood policy is available through most insurance agencies , as part of the Federal flood program . Usually , the coverage that is most important to the renter is for contents that could possibly be damaged as a result of flooding .
Farm Bureau does not underwrite and issue health insurance under their own brand name . But in some states Farm Bureau may have a marketing arrangement with health insurance carriers allowing their agents to offer health insurance to Farm Bureau policyholders . This type of arrangement is not unusual and widely used by multi-line carriers .
State Farm is a good company , and their term life insurance is good . Like every other insurance company , State Farm has people they can not insure , and people who will get good prices with them . You can go to a website to compare quotes from other companies to the State Farm quote you have . Be sure that you are comparing the same term length and the rating for which you qualify . You might qualify for a different health rating with different companies . An agent can pinpoint that for you .
I used to work for State Farm before becoming an independent insurance broker . Here are your options in the order that I would recommend them . 1 -RRB- Call your State Farm Agent . He or she can take down the claim information and submit it to the claims department for you . Your agent might also be able to tell you what is likely and unlikely to be covered by your policy . He/She will also be able to explain the claims process and provide you with updates . 2 -RRB- Call the claims department directly at 800-782-8332 . They can take your call 24 hours a day 7 days per week . 3 -RRB- File your claim online at WEBSITELINK 4 -RRB- Download the State Farm App and file a claim with your mobile device .
Currently , the largest US auto insurance company is State Farm , assuming we use written premiums as the criteria . State Farm has offices throughout the US . Following State Farm is Warren Buffet 's Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- Geico and other companies -RRB- , Allstate , Progressive , Farmers and USAA . Of course , these rankings change fairly often . In fact , Berkshire just recently passed Allstate for the Number 2 position . Many local companies in your area may not be the biggest carriers , but still write a lot of local business . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
State Farm , of course , is one of the largest insurers in the US and is very reputable . State Farm , like other major carriers , offers many types of homeowners policies . For example , if you own and occupy the home , the most common policy will cover your structure , contents , detached structures and also provide coverage for medical payments to others , liability and additional living expenses in the event of specific situations . Also , condominium and renter 's policies are offered along with contracts for homes you own but do not occupy . Visiting a reputable insurance website will provide more specific details along with free quotes from additional carriers .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Car Insurance Is Good For Young Drivers ?
There is not any absolute answer to this question . Rates for auto insurance coverage can vary greatly from carrier to carrier and from area to area . Contact local agents in your area to find out about coverage availablity and pricing within your area . Look for an agent that you are comfortable working with as they will be the first and last point of contact in most instances .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
The cheapest car insurance for young will depend on your state and zip code . If you are a Maryland resident and you are between the agesof 16 and 20 , it will be very difficult not impossible to find insurance in the standard market . Some exceptions to this is when the Child goes on Parents Insurance policy . In Maryland , MAIF or the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund insures most young and inexperience drivers or experience driver with accidents and tickets . They must have been declined coverage by at least two standard insurance companies or none renewed by one to qualify for coverage with MAIF . In some cases Progressive may also be good with young drivers but their rates are better if the driver is at least 21 and have good credit score Hope this helps .
This is not always the case there are some carriers that actually give you young driver discount and also if you have good grades that help . The main reason it is higher is because you are less experienced driver and are more likely to have an accident but there are many factors for this . Also the type of car you drive makes a difference also . I insure a 17 yr old who is on her own policy and has had tickets and drives a 2 door car and with just liability is only $ 160 a month that is not a bad rate as here inMontana the average young driver you can figures is 100 a month before you even think about adding a car this is being added to another policy . My recommendations are to talk to a local agent and see what type of discounts they offer for younger drivers and if you are being listed on another persons policy or not .
Statistically young drivers present the greatest risk for a claim to an insurance carrier due to their inexperience behind the wheel . Young drivers are more likely to be involved in some sort of questionable or reckless activity . This does mean that every young driver is irresponsible or that they will be involved in activities that will cause a claim . Many young drivers are more responsible and less reckless than older drivers but insurance carriers tend to create rates based on age and geographic location as major factors .
Many different statistics are analyzed by iInsurance Companies when developing their rate for various classes of drivers . Over the years , it has been fairly typical that those statistics indicated that inexperienced young male drivers have tended to be involved and or responsible for more auto accidents than have their female counterparts . As a result , rates for young men have been generally higher than those for young women . You and your parents should speak with your Insurance Professional about any and all available discounts in order to help you manage the cost of your car insurance . Ask about discounts for good grades , driver education course completion and bundling along with anoy other options they may have to offer .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
The obvious answer is to check with several local insurance agencies for pricing evaluations . Insurance prices are often a serious issue for many families , of course . There is definitive sensitivity to family budgets , However , being driven by the lowest prices is going to result in purchasing low liability limits . Think in terms of each young driver having at least one at-fault accident in the next 12-18 months . Then think how much damage might occur , in each occurrence . Let 's say your first young family driver , due to inattentiveness - -LRB- remember when you were a young driver ? -RRB- - rear-ends a fairly new mid-priced automobile , causing $ 5,000 in damages . Worse , the driver of the other vehicle claims to have sustained neck and back pains , goes to an attorney and starts the process of accumulating medical expenses . Not uncommon at all . Now , add an alleged injured passenger in the car that was rear-ended . Do some quick math as to the possible costs and keep that number in mind when considering how much you might have to pay out-of-pocket , based on the low liability limits that you are weighing , to save money on the premium .
I love CPA 's . They give great accounting advice and some of them even know other things . But the `` minimum limits '' advice defies his training in some important ways . What your son lacks in `` assets '' he more than makes up for in terms of `` potential '' . What I mean here is that he may not have it now , but due to his young age , he 'll have a long time to earn and pay . Even though he is only 18 does not mean that he can not be responsible for an injury or death , or damage to property , and be subjected to an order of the court to garnishee his wage to make reimbursement to those who were injured , killed , or had property damaged . Now , should have have his own insurance ? Assuming he owns the car , he probably needs his own insurance . Staying in the household under household coverage is also OK but some insurers concern themselves with the owner of the car being different than the insured on the policy so proceed with caution when the vehicle is not actually owned by the policyholder . As a practical matter , the discounts that you might enjoy are lost to the child in many cases when they have their own policy . Some companies will extend multi-policy discounts to children of the policy owner . Some discounts do n't come through this connection , however . I like kids learning the responsibility of maintaining their own insurance . It gets the loss off the parents record , for one . Parents can help subsidize the cost if they want and help provide this as a reward for good outcomes on something else . All things said and done , I like responsible children on their own policies but deal with young drivers both on and off the parents policies so it comes down to personal preference and whether you are dealing with issues that poison the whole policy because of the young driver , or not , in many cases .
Here in CT , one must be at least 16 years of age in order to obtain a drivers license . A 15 year old has the opportunity to obtain a learners ' permit within the regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles , but does not have to be listed as a driver on the parent 's policy . Other states may be different . Once a young driver receives his or her license , then they need to be listed on their parent 's auto policy as a regular driver in their home with access to their vehicles . If the 16 year old purchases a car of their own and wishes to register in in their own name , then they will need to obtain their own separate auto policy in order to accomplish that . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your state and the best options available for both you and your young driver .
The best place to start is by talking to your Insurance Professional about your existing car insurance . Ask about any and all available discounts that your company may offer . If you have 2 cars and your daughter will make 3 drivers , she might be elligible for occasional driver rates which can save money . Likewise , her successful completion your state approved Driver Education course and a maintenance of good grades in school can also certainly help keep the premiums down . LIke the rest of us , it is also critical that your young driver follow the rules of the road and operate your car in a lawful and prudent manner in order to avoid tickets and accidents .
Generally speaking , yes , car insurance premiums tend to be higher for younger less experienced drivers . Certainly rates can vary between companies , but paying a bit more for your youthful driver should be something for which you plan . Talk to your Insurance Professional about taking advantage of any available discounts . Your company may offer such discounts for your young driver attending and graduating from a Drivers Ed class . Keeping their grades at `` B '' or better may also help . If you have less cars than drivers , your child could qualify for `` Occasional Driver '' rates .
Your daughter was not the prominent rating factor for the vehicle . Since you only have two cars and 3 drivers you were rating a spare driver . I would assume the other driver who is not yourself has a impact on the rate . Either a young driver or a driver with some violations may be in play . Actually your agent should be able to look at your policy and easily figure out what is driving the rate . You say she was paying 900.00 for the car she was rated on but actually this would be been inaccurate in the first place . Hard to explain in this type of format . Call your agent to get a better explanation since he or she has details of your policy .
That is a great question ! The thing to know about any insurance is that the costs are always based in great part on the risk of loss that the company has to shell out for . Any young or new driver will have a greater risk as they gain experience than an established driver , so the company will charge them more than the experienced driver . Young men in particular are a greater risk , and as a result , their rates are higher than most other drivers . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
A teenager must be included in a car insurance policy as soon as they have a license . In California that usually means that they will be assigned to a vehicle in the household where they are living . To comply with state law each driver must be insured to operate a car . For a variety of reasons many young people do not get drivers licenses at the earliest possible age . I have seen drivers being added onto policies after age 20 . Some students pursue such rigorous academic studies that driving is not an option . The bad news is that in California it isnt your age when you start driving but the number of years experience you have as a driver that will determine the classification used on your automobile insurance .
I believe a well-balanced , personalized portfolio is the best for young people . Young people should think about purchasing term insurance due to the fact you can get a lot more for lower premiums . They should also consider whole-life life insurance . Young people should also consider such products as : annuities , long-term care insurance and disability insurance etc. . Term insurance is a good product to cover expenses in case something happens to the young person before the whole-life life insurance has a chance to mature . How many times have young people been killed in car accidents or diagnosed with some form of a terminal illness ? Then the family has to put little jugs and jars around in businesses asking for donations to cover the final expenses and other debts . That is not a time for embarrassing situations like that . That is a time for mourning and for family gathering together . Whole-life life insurance is a great product due to the fact the premiums do not change over the life of the insured . These products , if set up correctly and under current tax laws , allow the insured to pass on a legacy to his heirs tax-free . Annuities are great products for young people to start so they can plan for retirement . When you are ready to retire it is to late to start planning . Long-term care insurance is great in case you need some form of assisted living at any stage of your life . Disability insurance is great in case you get hurt and can not work but you need money for shelter , food and other bills . I am not suggesting you purchase all of these products at one time . I do recommend you meet with a licensed insurance professional and get a good foundation built . Then add to your portfolio over time . Keep in mind these products are generally less expensive when you are young . It is kind of like building a house . You do not want to start with the roof and work down . You should really start with purchasing the land , looking at blueprints , checking out contractors and pulling permits etc. . Then you form the foundation and build upwards towards the roof . To your prosperity .
There 's no doubt about it . Car insurance for teenage drivers is expensive ! New drivers are 5 times more likely to have an accident . The good news is there are ways to lower your cost without sacrificing coverage . The biggest mistake I see parents make is reducing coverage when they add their son or daughter . If your child has an accident the parents will be sued , not the child . If you are going buy a car for your child buy an older vehicle and stay away from sport cars . A Mustang GT is not a good option for lowering your cost . If you are not going to buy a vehicle and have more drivers than cars , then you can list your child as an `` occasional driver '' . Most companies also offer Good Student Discounts and a discount for completing driver 's education so make sure you inquire about both of these for additional savings .
Good Question your teen must have a driver license . Some companies have better rate than other for young drivers and give discounts such as good student , teen driving education and other discount . Check with your current provider and also call a local insurance broker who can shop around for the best rate for your new driver .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
Auto insurance generally follows a vehicle , so guest drivers are usuallycovered . Your insurance company has the right to contest claims made by people who are excluded from your policy . If you permit someone to driveyour car regularly , he or she should be listed as an operator . It can be considered fraudulent if you share a car with someone on a regular basis without listing that person on the policy . Examples would be a young driver or someone with a DUI . Always read your policy document , and remember , if it is your car , you will be held liable if the damages exceed your insurance policy , so be careful before lending out your vehicle .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Is Open Enrollment For Medicare B ?
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . Please note , when you enroll in Part B during the general enrollment period , your effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
You will enrolled for Medicare Part A automatically when you turn 65 . If you are receiving Social Securiy you will be enrolled in Part B automatically and Social Security will start deducting your Part B premium from your monthly Social Security Benefit . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits Medicare will notify you 4 to 6 months prior to your Medicare open enrollment period that you are eligible for Medicare the first day of your birth month on your 65th birthday . Your Open Enrollment Period is a 7-month period beginning 3-months before your 65th birthday and 3-months after . You can reply to the Medicare enrollment reminder to enroll you in Medicare or you can decline Part B . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits you will have to pay the first 3-months of your Part B premium by check or money order . You can decline Part B without penalty as long as you are enrolled in an qualified employer health care plan . If you are not enrolled in such a plan you will be penalized 10 % each year when or if you apply for Part B . You can also use the Medicare.gov website to enroll online .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . When enrolling under a special enrollment period , the effective date would be the 1st of the following month after you apply . The effective date of coverage when applying during the general enrollment period will be July 1 of the year you apply . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . Please note , when you enroll in Part B during the general enrollment period , your effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older you will be in your initial Medicare Open Enrollment Period to purchase a Medicare Supplement . You have six month from when your Part B takes effect to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately with no waiting period . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement anytime you want to outside of your initial Open Enrollment Period but once your Open Enrollment Period ends you will have to answer all health questions to qualify for a Medicare Supplement . If you have a serious health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium to get the pre-existing health condition covered .
Medicare will cover an EKG in one of two scenarios : 1 -RRB- When you 're new to Medicare , Medicare will cover an EKG screening with a referral from your doctor as a result of your one-time `` welcome to Medicare '' preventive visit . 2 -RRB- The other scenario is when your doctor orders it for diagnostic purposes . An EKG is covered under Medicare Part B. Medicare will pay for about 80 % of the costs after the Part B deductible is met -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- - you would be responsible for the other 20 % and the Part B deductible . When you first enroll in Medicare Part B , you open your 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! . A Medigap plan can cover the deductibles and a portion or all of the other 20 % of expenses covered by Part B and features a number of other big advantages as well . An experienced broker can help find the plan that 's most suitable for you and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of help . Thanks very much .
Yes ! Medicare will cover an EKG in one of two scenarios : 1 -RRB- When you 're new to Medicare , Medicare will cover an EKG screening with a referral from your doctor as a result of your one-time `` welcome to Medicare '' preventive visit . 2 -RRB- The other scenario is when your doctor orders it for diagnostic purposes . An EKG is covered under Medicare Part B. Medicare will pay for about 80 % of the costs after the Part B deductible is met -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- - you would be responsible for the other 20 % and the Part B deductible . When you first enroll in Medicare Part B , you open your 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! . A Medigap plan can cover the deductibles and a portion or all of the other 20 % of expenses covered by Part B and features a number of other big advantages as well . An experienced broker can help find the plan that 's most suitable for you and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of help . Thanks very much .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan . If you have any questions about your coverage or would like to review options for a Medicare supplement plan , please send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or call me at 703-665-9133 .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . Some people may be on Medicare before age 65 -LRB- certain requirements must be met such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan .
No . While most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 , some people can enroll before then . They must meet certain eligibility requirements such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . Some people may be on Medicare before age 65 -LRB- certain requirements must be met such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B has several enrollment periods that you should be aware of . The enrollment period that you may qualify for may vary based on what your current situation is . The first Medicare Part B enrollment period that most people experience is the `` Initial Enrollment Period '' . This is a 7 month window that starts 6 months before the first day of the month in which you turn 65 and lasts 6 months after the month in which you turn 65 . If you enroll in Part B using this enrollment period your medicare Part B will start on the first day of the month you turn 65 or if you enroll after your 65 birthday your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month . The Part B `` General Enrollment Period '' is for individuals over 65 that do not currently have medicare part B or other creditable health coverage . This period is from Jan 1st through march 31st every year . If you enroll in part B using this General Enrollment Period your Part B coverage will start on July 1st of the same year . There is also a `` Special Enrollment Period '' that begins 63 days before and ends 63 days after the date you lost creditable health coverage from an active employer . You may also qualify for an 8 month Enrollment period that begins on the day you lose employment and/or employment based group health coverage .
Yes ! Medicare will cover an echocardiogram . Your doctor must order/prescribe one.An echocardiogram is covered under Medicare Part B. Medicare will pay for about 80 % of the costs after the Part B deductible is met -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- - you would be responsible for the other 20 % and the Part B deductible . Please note , when you first enroll in Medicare Part B , you open your 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! . A Medigap plan can cover the deductibles and a portion or all of the other 20 % of expenses covered by Part B and features a number of other big advantages as well . An experienced broker can help find the plan that 's most suitable for you and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of help . Thanks very much
Yes ! Medicare will cover an echocardiogram . Your doctor must order/prescribe one.An echocardiogram is covered under Medicare Part B. Medicare will pay for about 80 % of the costs after the Part B deductible is met -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- - you would be responsible for the other 20 % and the Part B deductible . Please note , when you first enroll in Medicare Part B , you open your 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! . A Medigap plan can cover the deductibles and a portion or all of the other 20 % of expenses covered by Part B and features a number of other big advantages as well . An experienced broker can help find the plan that 's most suitable for you and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of help . Thanks very much .
An x-ray is covered under Medicare Part B. Medicare will pay for 80 % of the Medicare-approved amount for the expense after the Part B deductible is met -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- - you would be responsible for the other 20 % and the Part B deductible . When you first enroll in Medicare Part B , you open your 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! . A Medigap plan can cover the deductibles and a portion or all of the other 20 % of expenses covered by Part B and features a number of other big advantages as well . An experienced broker can help find the plan that 's most suitable for you and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of help . Thanks very much .
Assuming you are not under 65 and disabled , you can apply any time you are at least 65 years old and enrolled in both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- original Medicare -RRB- . If you are on a Medicare Advantage Plan , you may not purchase a Medicare Supplement unless you switch back to original Medicare . The best time to `` sign up '' for a Medicare Supplement or `` Medigap '' policy is during your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , which lasts for 6 months and begins on the first day of the month your both 65 or older and enrolled in Medicare Part B . During your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , an insurance company can not use medical underwriting and can not rufue to sell you any Medigap policy it offers .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
At What Age Can You Get Car Insurance ?
You should be able to get car insurance at age 16 ... which is the earliest age in most states when you can legally drive an automobile . If you are living with your parents , and they have current coverage , it is best to title the vehicle in their name so you can take advantage of many available discounts . When you are older and have built up some driving experience , you canalwaysconsiderpurchasing a policy in your name .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
If you 're auto insurance is just too expensive for you to afford , there are some things you can do to help ease that burden . You may not like some of my advice , but it 's the right advice . A very large part of your insurance premium is the physical damage to the car itself . Raising deductibles will lower your premiums somewhat . Ask yourself if you really need to cover the physical damage at all . If it 's an older car and you own it outright , this could be an option . Before you do this , however , understand that , if your car is damaged , the insurance company will not pay to fix it . One thing not to do is to lower your bodily injury liability limits . You wo n't save very much and you 'll be putting everything you own at risk , including your income . Here 's the advice you may not like : Perhaps you have too nice a car for your budget . If that 's the case , get a less expensive car . Then , when your finances -LRB- or your driving record -RRB- allow , you can always get a nicer car . Talk to an agent you can trust . They can give you advice on these questions as well as others . It also helps if you check rates on a car before you buy it . Everyone loves getting a new car . You just do n't want an unpleasant surprise when your insurance bill comes .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
If your car is considered totaled then a good indicator would go look at NADA > com or Kelly blue book online this would be a close estimate as to what they will give you now if you decided to keep the car you can do that also but you will get less cash for your car from the claim . Another way you can do this is make sure that you know the value of your auto you can call car dealerships and they can tell you what the car was worth prior to the accident . Insurance is to indemnify not to put you ahead . What you think your car is worth may not be as much as an adjuster thinks so be prepared and have a realistic value for your auto . Also if you had optional permanently attached equipment make sure that your policy had that listed or you may not get the value of that included . Hope this helps My best suggestion is to talk to you agent they should be able to help you with determining the value .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
At what age do you get life insurance has a simple answer . You can get life insurance at any age . Your parents can get it for you the day you are born if they so choose . Perhaps the better question might be when should you consider getting life insurance ? If you have a family , spouse or just children you should consider getting life insurance . If you own a small business , have key employee 's and/or a business partner , you might consider life insurance . If your concerned about your estate or would like to build tax free income for retirement , you might consider life insurance . You see , it really is not about your age so much but what is the purpose of the insurance . That said , the younger you are , the cost if insurance is less .
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
You can cancel at anytime . it is not the best idea to go with out insurance . If you are canceling because the car is not running or you no longer own the car and are looking for a replacement that is different . If your car is no longer working you can place just comprehensive coverage on it and no liability while it is disabled that way it has some protection on your car . But on the flip side . If you no longer own a car you can keep the insurance till you get a replacement car and be covered if you are borrowing someone 's car and they did n't pay their insurance . Also there is the option of non owned policy . Also when you start your insurance up again if you have gone more then 30 days with no coverage your rates increase for lack of proof of prior . Talk to your agent and see what works best for you . If you are canceling because of your budget talk to your agent and see what they can do to keep you covered and at a better rate .
Coverage follows the car . Example 1 : If you were given a car -LRB- loaned -RRB- and the car has no insurance , you can buy insurance on the car and your insurance will be primary . Another option , someone helped you to buy a car . For example your credit score is n't good enough to finance , so a friend of yours signed under your loan as a primary payor . You can get insurance under your name and even list your friend on the policy as a loss payee . In this case , we always suggest you get a loan gap coverage : the difference between the car 's actual cash value and the amount still owned on it . Example 2 : The car you are loaned has insurance . You can buy a policy under your name , list the car on that policy and in case of the accident , your policy will become a secondary or excess . Once the limits of the primary car insurance are exhausted , your coverage would kick in and hopefully pay for the rest . I specifically used the word hopefully , because each accident is unique and it 's hard to interpret the coverage without the actual claim scenario . And even with a given claim scenario , sometimes there are 2 possible outcomes of a claim .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
That is a great question ! I am sorry for your loss , it is tough when you do n't get to own the car long enough to even get a chance to enjoy it . Your insurer most likely uses what is called the `` Blue Book '' value to determine what your car is worth . The price that you paid three months ago most likely is higher than what the Blue Book will allow , since the car starts depreciating in value almost the minute that you drive it off the lot . They will factor in wear and tear , -LRB- dings , dents and normal wear of parts -RRB- and depreciation when they offer your settlement sum . Do not expect to get reimbursed for your tags and fees ; Those things are like gas to insurance companies , you need it to drive , but it 's not a part of the actual value of the car . If they do not give you what you want , you can always appeal the settlement , sometimes the company will give in and pay . I 'd hope so , in your case . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Market value -LRB- what others would pay for same car -RRB- with plus or minus depending on features , condition of vehcle , age , mileage -LRB- thats a big one -RRB- , type of car , quality of car , car been wrecked or under water ... As much as they cost now I recommend that you always get REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE and you get GAP COVERAGE . ALSO , GET EXTENDED WARRANTY FROM THE DEALER . I have been involved in these issues so many times that I still sit down and cry like a baby . People get it in the back so many times just because they are ignorant of coverages that are available to them ... shame shame agents and shame shame tightwad idiots
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Car Insurance Cover A Stolen Car ?
Car insurance will provide coverage if your car is stolen so long as your policy includes Comprehensive physical damage loss along with your chosen liabiulity protection . So long as you have comprehensive , the settlement for your stolen car would be handled from that by your claims professional . In order to file such a claim , it is very likely that your claims professonal will need to have a copy ofthe police report .
Car insurance will pay for a stolen car as long as you have comprehensive coverage . Comprehensive coverage covers the vehicle for damages not resulting from a collision accident . For example , fire , theft , glass breakage , a tree falls on the car , ect . If you car is stolen the insurance company will determined the blue book value and pay out the blue book value less your deductible . Kelly Blue Book is a good site to use to determine the value of your car . If your car is still financed and there is a gap in coverage you may end up stilling owing the finance company . Gap insurance is available to cover this need .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
The short answer is that unless the car is stolen , or parts of the car are stolen , theft of items from a car are not covered . You 'll seek this coverage from your homeowner insurance . If your car is stolen there is a small amount of coverage that comes from the auto after 48 hours . As usually , check with your local agent or insurance company to see how they have written your policy but what I have described in the common policy construction . Auto policies are not designed to coverage your personal property .
If you car is stolen and not recovered then the insurance company , providing you have comprehensive coverage , will determine the actual cash value of your vehicle and then write you a check for the stolen vehicle . You will have to relinquish the title over to the insurance company . If you had a loan on the vehicle the loan will be paid off first and you will receive what ever is left . If you do not have comprehensive coverage then you have no coverage for the loss . If you car is recovered then it will be determined if the car is repairable or a total loss depending on the condition the car is found in . Most insurance companies will wait 30 days to see if the car is recovered or not then just call it a loss at that point if the car is not recovered .
If your asking will renters insurance cover a stolen car the answer is no . Auto insurance comprehensive coverage will cover a stolen car . If you asking if any of your personal items left in the car are covered for theft then the answer is theft from a vehicle is a covered peril . Now it would depend on what the item actually was that is in question and will the stolen item meet the deductible . Also if the auto was damaged during the incident you could potentially have two claims . One one the auto for the damage to the vehicle and on for your personal property that was in the vehicle . Also please note , items permanently mounted to your auto are part of the auto .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
When your car is damaged it is covered if you have physical damage coverages . Comprehensive covers claims that come from damage other than collision . The car will be repaired minus the deductible . The contents stolen from the car , however , are not covered by the auto policy . For the items in the car to be covered they must be covered by a homeowners or renters policy .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
I can only think of two institutions that actually require car insurance . First , if the state in which you live and register your car has a law that imposes such a requirement in order to register it . Second , if you buy a new car with a lien or lease a new car , the financing company will imposes requirements for insurance . Now , that having been said , it still makes good sense to buy car insurance even if either of those two reasons are not imposed . Car insurance protects you in the event it is stolen , damaged in an accident or otherwise affected . But further , it provides important financial protection in the event you cause an accident and are held liable for any injuries or damage that result from that accident .
Car insurance typically follows the car . That is , if you are insuring your car and you lend the vehicle to another driver , your insurance pays the damages . Also , if your car is stolen , ofcourse the damages caused would be covered by your own insurer . Each state is different so it is important to speak to a broker about your current state laws regarding following the driver or car .
No , if your car is broken into and personal items stolen from it , there is no coverage for those items . Your car policy , so long as you have Comprehensive Physical Damage coverage , will take care of the damage caused to your car in the act of this crime . You will need to file a police report of course . Next turn to your Homeowners ' , Condo Unit Owners ' or Renters ' Insurance policy for coverage for your stolen belongings .
Car insurance will provide coverage if your car is stolen so long as your policy includes Comprehensive physical damage loss along with your chosen liabiulity protection . So long as you have comprehensive , the settlement for your stolen car would be handled from that by your claims professional . In order to file such a claim , it is very likely that your claims professonal will need to have a copy ofthe police report .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
That can be a problem on a few levels . There is , of course , the obvious . If you have a car and no insurance , then if it is damaged in an accident or stolen for example , you pay for your own loss . Without insurance , if you cause an accident , you 'll also pay for the damages and poossibly injury to the other person and their car . Needless to say , in either case , you are out quite a lot of your hard earned money . But here is another problem you will have . CT , like many states require car insurance in order to register a car . If you cancel your insurance , eventually CT DMV is going to catch up with you and the fines can be pretty stiff . Bottom line , the best advice for saving money is to buy and maintain quality car insurance protecting you for the coverage you need .
As a general rule , most homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for personal property that is stolen from a car . The stolen property will be subject to your property deductible and depending on the type of property stolen , your policy may have a limit to the coverage amount provided . For example , money , jewelry , electronic devices , and other `` high value '' items are typically limited to a maximum coverage amount of $ 500 - $ 1,000 unless your policy includes increased limits through an endorsement . As a side note , your auto policy may also include a small limit of coverage for property stolen from the vehicle .
Assuming the GPS was stolen from inside an insured auto , the answer is maybe . If the GPS was installed in the car -LRB- e.g. , permanently attached in the dashboard -RRB- and the car had comprehensive coverage , then the GPS theft would be covered subject to the comprehensive deductible . However , if the GPS was of the type like mine that you affix to the windshield with a suction device , that would not be considered `` installed equipment '' and would not be eligible for the car 's comprehensive coverage . In that case , your only other possibility for coverage on the auto insurance would be if your policy provided additional coverage for personal items inside the car . Most standard auto coverage forms do not include additional coverage for personal items , but some do - usually capped at $ 1,000 - $ 2,000 . Also , your auto policy may have an added endorsement that provides coverage for personal items . The last resort - you may be able to claim the GPS theft on your homeowners -LRB- or renters policy -RRB- if the auto policy does not cover it .
Great question . While there are many factors that effect the rate on each car . Each insurance company has diffrent rates on each car . There is a annually report on the most stolen cars in the USA . If your car ranks low in that report your insurance rate will be low as well .
Renters insurance covers the theft of things inside your vehicle , as that is personal property not car insurance . Renters insurance would not cover the car itself , that is car insurance . Also , renters insurance travels with you , so like on vacation or a cruise and some of your personal items are stolen .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Where Can I Get Car Insurance With A Learner Permit ?
Most major auto insurance companies will insure you with a learner 's permit ... assuming that you are a listed driver on your parent 's -LRB- for example -RRB- policy . Typically , you are not charged a premium during the pre-licensing stage but you will be rated on the policy once you obtain your full driving privileges .
Depending on your age and state some carriers can issue a policy as a non owned and cover your with out a license but as soon as you get your license you will need to change that . If you are just a driver on a policy and have a permit and change to a license it should lower the rates
Yes , you can get car insurance with a learner 's permit or a school and work permit . The public interest is served by having all driver 's have auto insurance , so state insurance commissions do n't look too favorably on insurance companies if they refuse to insure permitted drivers . If you are under 18 you will likely need a parent on the policy with you as you are too young to sign a contract , but that is the only issue I have ever seen with a permit . Let me know if you have more questions .
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
Probably not as an insurance company will need your drivers license number in order to issue a policy . If you have your learners permit and are living with your parents , then more than likely their auto insurance policy will cover you while you are driving one of their cars . Once you earn your license , you can either stay on their policy or if you decide to make that purchase and register the car in your name , then you would get your own policy . Remember , start by talking to their Insurance Professional and asking about insuring your car with the same company . You could be enjoying some great money saving discounts when you do .
Each carrier is different but I have found that the most common practice is that a driver with a learner 's permit is not added to an auto policy until they are actually licensed . Coverage under a relative 's policy would extend to the driver with a permit in the event of a claim .
You need to notify your insurance company as soon as your teenager has a drivers license . Most insurers dont need to know if the dependent has a learners permit . Usually this involves a telephone call to the company or their agent . You can expect that the inexperienced driver will be assigned to one of the cars and that will impact the premium for that car .
Actually , at least here in Connecticut , only licensed drivers need to be added to your policy . Your daughter just has her learners ' permit so as such is not yet a licensed driver . I happen to represent Nationwide and our auto policy automatically covers our clients and their children as they are learning to drive the family car -LRB- s -RRB- . I think that perhaps your agent just needs to check the terms and conditions of your particular policy . You did the right thing by being proactive and advising your agent that she is learning to drive .
Here in CT , one must be at least 16 years of age in order to obtain a drivers license . A 15 year old has the opportunity to obtain a learners ' permit within the regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles , but does not have to be listed as a driver on the parent 's policy . Other states may be different . Once a young driver receives his or her license , then they need to be listed on their parent 's auto policy as a regular driver in their home with access to their vehicles . If the 16 year old purchases a car of their own and wishes to register in in their own name , then they will need to obtain their own separate auto policy in order to accomplish that . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your state and the best options available for both you and your young driver .
The policy requires that all the drivers in the household be identified . In California you do not have to identify someone who has a learners permit . Once the person gets a license the insurer must be notified . Agents will frequently start tracking children after their 14th birthday to make sure that drivers license information is gathered in a timely manner .
There are insurance providers that will offer insurance coverage while carrying a learners permit but they are limited . My advice is to contact a local independent agent who has a much broader access to various insurance providers . This way the agent can shop around and find you policy that will meet your needs .
Most major auto insurance companies will insure you with a learner 's permit ... assuming that you are a listed driver on your parent 's -LRB- for example -RRB- policy . Typically , you are not charged a premium during the pre-licensing stage but you will be rated on the policy once you obtain your full driving privileges .
If you have a learners permit you are more than likely driving only with a blood relative or legal guardian that you currently reside with . If that is the case then you should be covered by the existing auto insurance policy that they have in place when you are driving their vehicle with them .
Only licensed drivers are listed on auto policies in California . Those driving a vehicle with a learners permit are not included . You should notify your agent as soon as your inexperienced driver is licensed . In California the driver will be considered inexperienced for several years in two steps .
That is a great question ! In most cases , the learner is added to someone else 's policy as a driver until such time as they can get their own policy . Parents add their child as a driver on the vehicle , as it is generally cheaper than the policy for a teenager would be . Thanks for asking !
I have a hard time imaging how backdating a car insurance policy could ever be good for the insurance carrier so , all the carriers I am familiar with refuse and prohibit backdating . I can think of a couple of reasons it is desirable to backdate insurance from the customer point of view : 1 -RRB- To be able to prove insurance to a regulatory or financial entity on a certain prior date when coverage was not maintained . 2 -RRB- To be able to obtain coverage for a loss and avoid out of pocket expenses on a certain prior date when no coverage existed . Most carriers carefully underwrite the reason why any date but the present date is installed on an application for insurance . It is often also true that state law makes it illegal for an agent to backdate coverage . It does n't matter if it is car insurance , home insurance , or even life insurance , backdating is a bad idea for the insurer and the agency or agent . On this point , however , there are companies in the life insurance portion of my business that will permit backdating to save age . They wo n't accept this provision if the insured is not healthy or there are health events that create concern in the period of time back to the prior birth date . If you are not healthy now , they wo n't issue the coverage . Then , if they agree , all the premium back to the prior date will need to be paid but , the customer will enjoy a permanently lower rate based upon the prior age so this is the only time I am aware of when backdating - and I use the term very loosely here - is permitted on a written insurance policy . On car insurance , no backdating method I know of exists for all the reasons I have written -LRB- and some I have n't -RRB- .
I suggest a number of different approaches . How much coverage would you want the person to carry if they injured you or your family or damaged your property in a car accident ? If you cause an accident , injure family members riding with you and are from a state permitting intra-family suits , how much coverage would you want available to pay for their injuries ? And of course , how much do you stand to lose ? What is your net worth , the value of your earning power , and/or the value of your personal integrity ? None of these methods will lead you to the perfect limit but they are the considerations I would suggest one think about when selecting the appropriate amount of insurance . In addition , I always suggest your uninsured/under-insured motorists coverage -LRB- the one that covers you , your family and possibly the passengers in your car in case the other car is not insured or poorly insured -RRB- be consistent with the coverage you carry in case you hurt someone else . However if none of these considerations apply , one must always be aware of the minimum limits required by most state laws .
Because , under the right circumstances and with the right carrier , you can outperform whole life 's growth by buying universal life . Universal is tied to certain market activity , which can permit additional growth over the carriers general fund . However , in down markets , it permits loss , which can actually cause an increase in the premium . There is , however , an easy way to prevent any such loss . Buy Indexed universal life . It provides a slight decrease in the market 's appreciation in exchange for a guarantee that you will never lose money when the market drops . Your funds are locked in annually . Talk with your agent . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Auto insurance follows the car . The car is insured . If the person named on the insurance policy permits you to drive the vehicle , and you are a licensed driver , the coverage afforded under the cars policy applies . The exception would be if you were a member of the household and were specifically excluded from operating the vehicle . That would appear as an endorsement or would be a part of the policy itself .
Backdating an effective date means coverage was effective from that date forward and as a common practice , it is prohibited by carriers . There are controlled situations where they may permit backdating . One is where there is a `` statement of no loss '' but it is risky business for the carrier if you are a new customer . We accept a `` statement of no loss '' when reinstating coverage but only with the permission of the carrier and the form is their requirement not ours . If an agency is willing to backdate without the carrier he/she has probably violated carrier rules and/or state law .
end question
start question
other-insurance
Peronsal liability insurance for author of apps/source code ?
With all due respect to the answer given by the first insurance professional to answer this question , there are two different coverage angles to take into account . Let 's tackle the first issue and that is of the professional or product liability . A homeowner policy will not extend itself to cover the liability that arises our of the professional services to write software or machine code that is either given away or incorporated into a commercial product offered to others . In the event of a loss of lawsuit I do n't think you will find coverage and I think if a claim were to be presented a `` reservation of rights '' letter will be issued upon notification of a claim so the carrier can explore the issue prior to rejecting the loss as `` professional liability '' that is not covered in a liability section of a home insurance policy . On the other hand , many companies permit the use of the home for office related tasks and the liability exposure for pedestrian traffic onto the property and/or into the house will probably be covered when the avocation is merely a hobby . Usually the presence of this additional exposures are required to be admitted to the carrier . That said , all claims issues are ultimately compared against coverage terms and language and no one should rely on this general advice as anything other than a reminder to consult with your insurance agent for the best answer . And finally , I am aware of no coverage that is available for the hobby coder to add to a home insurance policy . It would be interesting to know if you actually work in the computer software business in your day to day paid work .
You will not find coverage for business related liability in your homeowners policy , even if you work from your home . This is a very technical kind of risk and would probably best be handled by a specialty company . The risk , however , is general liability , or more specifically product liability . Policies usually restrict losses to those involving personal injury or property damage . Coverage does not necessarily extend to a program that simply doesnt perform as promised .
If the title -LRB- proof of ownership ` in your name ' -RRB- is not in your name and you desire to register and insure the vehicle , you will need documentation of an insurable interest : lease agreement , etc. that a carrier will accept to underwrite a policy.Make sure you include all insurable interests on your policy - lessor as additional named insured for liability and named as loss payee for physical damage . If the vehickle is titled to another individual , many states allow you to obtain a signed authorization -LRB- a DMV form -RRB- in which the titled owner authorizes you to register and insure the vehicle . Again , make sure you can list the titled owner as an additional insured for liability and as a loss payee -LRB- along with any lienholder currently on the vehicle -RRB- . Make suire your state 's DMV will allow you to do what you want to do as far as the registration goes and then find as carrier that will underwrite the situation . A good agent or broker can assist you or you can act as your own broker and obtain insurance online . If you act as your own broker , good luck .
If you 're the owner of the business -LRB- or authorized person to set up group coverage for the business -RRB- , you should work with an experienced health insurance broker who can review options for multiple companies and create a thorough comparison between plans . Group insurance works a lot different than individual insurance and is constantly changing in the marketplace . If you 're an employee of a business looking to sign up for group health insurance through your employer , then you would need to contact your HR representative to enroll . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- for most states -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . Some of the companies that can offer group plans include United Healthcare , Kaiser Permanente , Anthem BCBS , CareFirst BCBS , Aetna , and Coventry , to name a few . Even if you already have a group plan , you may want to compare the options with other plans available to you in the marketplace . In many circumstances , an alternative benefit structure can provide similar benefits and save you huge dollars in premiums . I hope the information is helpful . Please feel free to contact me for help if you would like assistance with your business ' program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are some statutory exemptions to the operating authority registration requirement . For example , carriers operating wholly within a commercial zone or within a 25-mile radius of an airport may not be required to obtain operating authority registration . These carriers , however , are still subject to FMCSAs safety jurisdiction and the USDOT registration requirement , in most cases . Interstate commerce generally occurs when a passenger is transported across a State boundary . In order to obtain operating authority registration , a motorcoach company must demonstrate that its operations meets the governments safety fitness standard and that the company is willing and able to comply with all applicable statutes and regulations , including regulatory insurance requirements . To obtain and retain operating authority registration , motorcoach companies must maintain and file evidence of $ 5 million in insurance coverage .
A fiduciary generally handles other peoples money . The key is the authority that has been extended to the person involved . Many sales representatives have little to know authority or opportunity to actually receive money from a client . The other issue would be if the representative has authority to conduct business on behalf of the client .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
When you lease a car you do not hold the title so you are not the ` owner ' of the vehicle . Your lease may require you to provide insurance on the vehicle . Your policy -LRB- in your name -RRB- names the lessor as additional insured for liability coverages and loss payee for physical damasge coverages . If an individual holds title to the vehicle and you want to insure it , you will most likely have to register the vehicle in your name -LRB- a form from the state 's DMV authorizes this -RRB- and obtain insurance to cover your registration and plates . In this instance you would also name the individual title holder as additional insured for liability and loss payee for physical damage . If they have a lienholder on the vehicle you will have to include the lienholder as first loss payee and the individual as second loss payee . Chec k with a knowledgeable agent or broker who writes auto insurance for specific details . Your state 's DMV can also provide information . Maske sure an insurance carrier will underwrite the policy should you want to insure a vehicle you do not hold the title to .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
I suggest that if you have a complaint or grievance with your health insurer , that you contact your State Insurance Department to file a complaint . Your State Insurance Department will be able to handle it , or at least direct your type of complaint to the right authority . Of course , these sorts of complaint filings are long and drawn out and can take anywhere from 90 days to 3 years . So , you might be better off trying to work with your insurer first and exhaust all of those procedures before going to the authorities . That way , if the insurer is being malicious or faulty , you have more evidence to support your complaint . And depending on the type of grievance you have , all insurer 's have appeals and grievance processes to resolve issues and avoid any legal battle -LRB- or bad reputation backlash with consumers -RRB- . If you have an insurance agent , take it to them first and have them help you file any paperwork with the insurer . If you do n't have an agent , you can contact the insurer yourself . But , definitely exhaust those option first , then go to your State Insurance Department . If they are unhelpful , then you could always go to the federal Department of Health and Human Services and/or Consumer Protection Agency .
Medicare will cover some forms of pain management . Some , but not all , medical practitioners are covered by Medicare pain management programs . Doctors , and in some states CRNA 's -LRB- certified registered nurse anesthetists are covered under Medicare . Infusion pumps may also be authorized for coverage under Medicare when authorized by your pain management physician .
Yes , there is a form in the application called a HIPAA -LRB- Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act -RRB- that gives the carrier authorization to order and view your medical records . This authorization usually remains in-force for 24 months -LRB- 12 months in Kansas -RRB- from the date signed . A parent or guardian signs this form on behalf of a minor .
AARP is not an insurance company , However The Hartford offers discounts to AARP members on both home and auto insurance . The Hartford has been in business for over 200 years and is a highly reputable insurance company . Just to note : not all Hartford agents are authorized to offer AARP discounts . AARP qualified agents must go though certain training and be approved before being able to offer The Hartford 's AARP product . You should easily be able to do a web search to find a local agent who can offer Hartford 's AARP product . I myself am an AARP authorized agent in the state of California .
Zyban is chemically similar to Buproprion . Both medications are used to treat depression but also can be used as part of a smoking cessation program . Buproprion is covered by Medicare Part D and does not require prior authorization from your carrier . Zyban may be prescribed by your doctor as part of a smoking cessation program if other treatment protocols have not worked . Medicare Part D may require prior authorization .
If your vehicle is damaged as a result of negligence by the body shop -LRB- or authorized dealership -RRB- , your auto insurance policy will not provide reimbursement for any out-of-pocket expenses you incur . Your best option is to work directly with the body shop/dealership that did the repair work an attempt to work out am amicable solution agreeable to both parties . Damage to the engine can be potentially very expensive , and perhaps render your vehicle unfit and unsafe to drive . Hiring an attorney may be your next-best recourse if the offending party is uncooperative . Important Note : This answer was provided by Ed Harris , one of the nation 's premier car insurance brokers . Carinsurancezoom.org is the leading US trusted authority for providing the best car insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Let me add a few comments here on how the coverages are usually presented on a Declaration page of a Homeowners policy . First there is the party being insured and who the company is that is providing the insurance . Then there is a specific term for the coverage to begin and end . Then there are many ways to then itemize the coverage , but here are some basics . The policy is usually divided into two Sections . Section I deals with property insurance and Section II Liability Insurance , so within the section I coverages there are usually four parts Coverages A , B , C , D. Coverage A is the Dwelling Coverage . This can be sold on an Actual cash value basis -LRB- very infrequently , but watch out for it -RRB- usually on a 100 % of the dollar value of the estimated cost to replace the house itself . This is often difficult for consumers to understand , but no one really cares about the market value . What is important is the replacement cost and replacing one house destroyed is usually a lot more expensive then building one new in a subdivision . Make sure you have enough coverage . This is not an exact science so many companies offer extensions to increase the coverage beyond the stated value . Next is Coverage B : These are the other structures appurtenant , outbuildings , fences , Gazebos unattached garages etc. . Coverage C is usually Personal Property or Contents Coverage . This is very important to understand : You want replacement cost coverage not Actual Cash Value , ACV . The easiest way to think of this is the ten your old large and 200 lb TV . The ACV is going to be next to nothing . There is no continuing interest in buying that type TV anywhere . But replacing it with a new TV with light weight plasma features is what you want . Coverage D is Additional Living Expense . This can be stated two different ways or a mixture of the two . Some companies list a maximum dollar limit available . Others list a maximum time limit and still others list a maximum time limit and dollar limit . This covers the additional cost of living elsewhere while your home is reconstructed . It can also come into play if a Governmental authority wo n't let you near your home for safety reasons -LRB- i.e. forced evacuation form an impending hurricane -RRB- . This coverage does not pick up the cost of things you would normally pay out of pocket , but the additional things and costs necessary to keep your household going while your home is repaired . The next set of coverages comprise Section II or liability coverage . Coverage E is very broad and covers such things as an injury to a child by your dog , or an inadvertent collapse of you deck with guests on it etc. . Coverage E then is is sold in increments of 100,000 usually . The difference in price from say 300,000 to 500,000 is usually only a few dollars a year . If you have an umbrella policy , you may be required to carry a minimum of 500,000 in coverage . Coverage F is Medical payments coverage . This is usually quite nominal and is used to cover minor incidents where fault may not be much of an issue , but you feel obliged to pay for the medical bill . For example a neighbor picks up your mail for you while you are gone and trips on your garden hose . The injuries are not serious , but do require a couple stitches . The limit is low because the much more serious incidents would require negligence or absolute liability and would fall under Coverage E. I hope this helps . If you are in AZ.CA , TX , MO , or GA we 'll be glad to assist you with placing your homeowners coverage .
Yes - life insurance companies can check medical records when you apply for coverage , regardless of whether you 're applying for a fully underwritten program or a no-exam life insurance program . The reason they can do this is because you are granting them access when you apply for coverage by signing a HIPAA authorization form . HIPAA was created to help protect the confidentiality and security of healthcare information . The HIPAA form authorizes the carrier to obtain needed medical information for the purposes of underwriting your program . Typically , the carriers may only order a copy of the records when you apply for a certain level of coverage or length of coverage because of the expense involved in doing so . For small policies -LRB- e.g. $ 25,000 , $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 , etc. -RRB- , carriers will generally feature more relaxed underwriting and have fewer requirements . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your program or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The argument being made for the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- being unconstitutional essentially boils down to whether the United States Constitution gives the Federal Government the legal authority to compel citizens to purchase a product or service . The powers of what the Federal Government can do are -LRB- supposedly -RRB- strictly defined in the U.S. constitution with all other powers not granted to the Federal Government being granted to the individual states . There is also the issue of whether the Federal Government under its authority to regulate interstate commerce can coerce a citizen into engaging in an economic activity within the confines of their own state . This is where the argument regarding the `` individual mandate '' comes into play . Can the Federal Government penalize someone for not engaging in an economic activity , in this case refusing to purchase health insurance ? I would refer you to the United States Constitution -LRB- It 's a surprisingly short read -RRB- to make your own judgment as to whether the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is in compliance with our government 's owner 's manual .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Would Someone Be Turned Down For Life Insurance ?
Unfortunately , some people are turned down for life insurance for very simple reasons because they did not sign up for the appropriate policy to start with . To avoid being turned down , be sure to read the guidelines very carefully . It is far better to converse with an agent to be sure you did not overlook something . E.g. . Some policies require that you have a drivers license ; some do n't . Some require that you are a US citizen ; some do n't . Some allow a certain policy to cover people with diabetes ; some do n't . Those type of declines are easy to avoid by just talking to tan agent . Other declines are more complicated . You may have a history of depression that sounds OK , but then get declined because your doctor wrote something in your medical records of which you were unaware . With any kind of health history or risk factors such as past alcohol treatment , use an impaired risk specialist to lower your chance of being turned down . There are policies out there for nearly everyone if you know where to look .
There can be several factors that lead to a underwriting declination . Health history and current medical condition are significant items in the crediting or debiting of the underwriting balance sheet . Personal behaviors like motor vehicle violations , drug addictions , dangerous recreational activities , even hazardous occupations can be the basis of an underwriting declination .
Yes , you can turn down Medicare . However , with no premium for Medicare Part A , and in consideration of the valuable health care that it provides , one should give very careful consideration before turning down Part A. Part B is not needed if you are still working and receiving group health insurance , so it can be turned down and picked up later . Again , to turn it down permanently , first look hard at the benefit it provides , and the alternatives , before making that decision .
Yes , you can turn down Medicare . If you are automatically enrolled in Medicare , you will receive a form in your packet that you can simply return to turn down Medicare Part B due to being in a group plan . You will need to contact your Social Security office to discuss the ramifications of turned down Medicare Part A . But you can turn down Part A , as well .
There are a variety of reasons why an applicant can be turned down . The leading cause of declination is poor health . Another reason for declination could be substance abuse and/or addiction to drugs or alcohol . Your motor vehicle driving record could contain multiple traffic violations , even DUI . What could be a hobby for some , will be too great a risk for the life insurance company like cliff diving or deep sea scuba . Underwriting may deem that the life insurance cant be justified on the basis of the proposed beneficiary or that the amount of coverage is not warranted . These are just a few of the possible scenarios that could cause your application for life insurance to be turned down .
You can be turned down for a Medigap Policy . If you are in your Open Enrollment Period -LRB- new to Medicare -RRB- or if you can qualify for Guarantee Issue you can not be turned down regardless of your health . If you are not in Open Enrollment or Guarantee Issue you have to answer all health questions on the application so the insurance company can determine if you qualify medically for their Medigap Policy . If you have serious health conditions you can be turned down or you could be charged a much higher premium for the coverage because of the pre-existing health conditions .
Unfortunately , some people are turned down for life insurance for very simple reasons because they did not sign up for the appropriate policy to start with . To avoid being turned down , be sure to read the guidelines very carefully . It is far better to converse with an agent to be sure you did not overlook something . E.g. . Some policies require that you have a drivers license ; some do n't . Some require that you are a US citizen ; some do n't . Some allow a certain policy to cover people with diabetes ; some do n't . Those type of declines are easy to avoid by just talking to tan agent . Other declines are more complicated . You may have a history of depression that sounds OK , but then get declined because your doctor wrote something in your medical records of which you were unaware . With any kind of health history or risk factors such as past alcohol treatment , use an impaired risk specialist to lower your chance of being turned down . There are policies out there for nearly everyone if you know where to look .
There are a number of reasons to be turned down for life insurance . I have elaborated on them in my article here , along with ways to avoid or correct each problem : WEBSITELINK In summary , they are : 1 -RRB- The product does not cover your health condition or other risk factor -LRB- such as suspended drivers license , recent bankruptcy , dangerous hobby -RRB- 2 -RRB- Your application is incomplete and no one points it out to you 3 -RRB- Something is in your medical records that you are unaware of , that causes you to be declined 4 -RRB- The underwriter asks for more medical records and no one provides them 5 -RRB- You have done everything right but your health does not meet the qualifications Being turned down is a frustrating , heart wrenching experience . You can lessen your chances of being turned down by using an agent or agency that understands your health and risk factors and puts you with the correct product to start with , then follows the underwriting process closely to make sure it is completed properly . Sometimes , though , in trying to get the best price , declines do happen . It is not the end of the world . There is usually something else out there for you . Find yourself an agent who vows to stay the course with you until you get what you need .
No , enrollment in Part B Medicare is not mandatory . Some people put off enrolling in Medicare Part B until the next enrollment period -LRB- or more -RRB- after their 65th birthday because they are receiving good health insurance through the group plan offered at their place of employment . If you are enrolled in Part B Medicare automatically when you turn age 65 , you can turn it down . But do know the consequences of turning down Part B beforehand .
In some states , you are allowed to change Medigap plans at any time , without being asked any medical questions . However , in most states , if you are applying outside of your initial enrollment period -LRB- six months after you first get Medicare part B -RRB- , then you will have to qualify medically in order to switch Medigap policies . This means answering health questions on the insurance company application , and usually also involves a phone interview with you and verify your prescription drugs . In most cases , if you answer yes to any of the health questions being asked , you would not be approved by that particular company . That said , not all companies ask the same health questions , so being turned down by one company does not mean you would be turned down everyone .
Guaranteed Health Insurance means that if you apply for health insurance you can not be turned down because of any medical issues or pre-existing conditions . Prior to January 1 , 2014 if you applied for individual health insurance , in most states , you were medically underwritten and could be turned down , declined , or rates up 50-100 % over the standard rates . Guarantee issue means all insurance carriers must accept you .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
In addition to a credit check , insurance companies will also receive a report from a company that keeps track of insurance claims from almost all companies . If you have filed a claim or received a moving violation , the information will be reported to this agency . This is done to help insurance companies accurately assess each individual . If you are turned down for insurance based on information provided by the agency , you have the right to the a report , just as if you are turned down for credit .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
If you are receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you will be signed up for Medicare Part A and Part B automatically . When you get the packet in the mail , you will have a form that you can use to turn down Part B . At this time you can also opt out of Part A , but it is free and covers very expensive hospitalization costs , so you would be advised to keep it , or have very other good health insurance if you turned it down . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , it is not mandatory to apply for Medicare Part A or B at that time . However , it is again , advisable to at least get Part A .
Sometimes people are turned down for life insurance for very benign reasons , such as , they did not fit the age guidelines for a certain face amount . Sometimes the reasons for being denied are more involved , such as their blood sample showed that they may possibly have diabetes without knowing it . If you are turned down , contact your agent to see if he/she knows the reason for your decline . If you can not get the answer that way , you are free to contact me . I can usually figure it out by asking a few questions , and can find the lowest priced policy for which you do qualify .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why were you turned down for life insurance ? There could be numberous reasons or just one . If you were declined you should have been notified of the decline and advised to your rights to appeal the decision . Life insurance underwriting looks at your medical history , your current health , your driving record , your credit history and other things health and financial . You should have received a letter .
There is actually a whole list of why a person can be turned down for life insurance . Life insurance is a risk based product . Meaning an insurance company is willing to `` bet '' on your mortality and they are very good at it . They will promise you a rate for a given time period they are willing to accept in exchange for a large lump sum face amount paid to your beneficiary . Because of this risk their underwriters will look at very aspect of your life starting withage , build , occupation , life style , health status , geography , drug use and nicotine use to determine this risk . If any one of the aspects is outside of their risk tolerance then the person is declined for life insurance .
Well I have to admit it sure seems like it sometimes but auto insurance does not increase every year . There are many variable factors that come into play into an auto insurance rate . For example , driving record , types of vehicles , marital status , where you live and more . However for the sake of argument lets assume all factors remain stagnant and the rate still increases . The insurance industry flows through what we call hard and soft markets . A soft market is when insurance carriers are showing a profit , loss ratios are good and investments are performing . A hard market is when profits are down , loss ratios are high and investments are performing under expectation . It is more of a constant guessing game for the insurance carriers to operate a business and keep their heads above water . If losses continue and profits are down an insurance carrier will make a necessary adjustment to remain solvent by increasing rates . Rate changes can be local or regional depending on performance in any given area . If the market turns around and profits increase the carriers will then loosen up into what we call a softer marketopeningthe doors to more potential clients by lowering the rates again . Cycles usually run for several years before they shift one way or the other simply due to the time it takes to gather loss information and process it . I will give you an example of some recent trends . During the dot com era insurance companies were performing very well and rates were down . The market crashed and rates began increasing due to poor market performance and increased losses . Carriers got a handle on the situation and things seemed to be going well for the next couple of years and rates actually dipped a little , but now it seems we are back at an upswing . If someone was paying $ 500.00 for a 6 month policy that dropped to $ 450.00 for a year they were happy . But then a year later went to $ 475.00 from the consumers point of view this is a rate increase forgetting just two years back they may have been paying $ 500.00 . Again sometimes this type of movement is difficult to see since variables come into play such as moving to a new location , adding or changing cars , adding drivers and so on . I hope that helped at least explain alittlebit on how the insurance industry operates .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Cheapest Car Insurance Out There ?
The cheapest car insurance out there ? This is a question that I am often asked -LRB- since I 'm a broker with a top car insurance website -RRB- . It really depends on a number of factors including where you live , your age , your driving record etc. . . It could be Esurance . It could be Geico . It could be Progressive or many other carriers . The only way to find out is to provide some basic information and allow us -LRB- or a broker -RRB- to shop for the best rates .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
As with most everything in life , the best and the cheapest are rarely the same thing and you do tend to get what you pay for . The cheapest health insurance that meets the requirements under ObamaCare will have a very high deductible and have you paying for all health care services -LRB- except preventive care -RRB- out of your pocket until you have met that deductible that may be $ 6000 or more . If you never use any health care during the year then this would meet your criteria for being the cheapest and perhaps the best . The best heath insurance plans that meet the requirements under ObamaCare will provide you with reasonable copayments , a low deductible and relatively low out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure -LRB- maybe as low as several hundred or a thousand dollars -RRB- . However , these plans will have a significantly higher monthly premium . The true answer to your question is unique to each individual . You would be well served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you define your needs and budget and then find the best health insurance plan -LRB- either in the government marketplaces or outside them -RRB- that fits your needs .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
The cheapest car insurance for new drivers depends upon where you live , what type of vehicle you drive , how man tickets and accidents you have , and the type of coverage you want . An experienced broker with a top-rated website -LRB- That 's what we do best ! -RRB- saves customers up to 45 % in premiums by shopping and comparing the best available options . So to get the best rates and find the cheapest policy , utilize a broker . It 's free and you 'll save time and money .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
`` Cheaper '' in premium or `` cheaper '' in service provided and claims paid ? No one insurance company will always be the `` cheapest '' in premium . If you are looking for the cheapest premium , you best plan on shopping and switching monthly because competitive pricing/positioning is ALWAYS changing . However if you value appropriate coverage for your station in life , do your research on reputable companies , find an insurance professional you trust and stick with him or her . It will average out in the long term . You potentially do yourself a financial disservice at claim time if you elect to go with the cheapest .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
Everyone wants to pay less for car insurance butbe careful purchasingthe cheapest policy . Purchasing the cheapest policy onlinemay cost you severly down the road . For example , a home owner in Virginia recentlypurchased a policy online with state minmium limits . The policy was $ 15 less per month so he decided to switch . Two months later he was hit by an uninsured driver and in the hospital for 3 months . The new policy he purchased did not cover his car much less his medical bills . Cheaper is notbetter sowhen it comes to insurance focus on finding the best value .
I 'll share a common answer to a common question . It depends . Which company offers the cheapest auto insurance in Washington depends primarily on the insuredthe client . With all the variables companies use to get the final price , there is no way to tell what companies offers the cheapest rates for all clients all the time . In fact , most insurance companies do n't want to be the cheapest for every client . Most companies want to `` win '' accounts based on price 30-40 % of the time . With that information , it 's important to allow a trusted , licensed agent to shop multiple companies for you .
The cheapest long term care insurance company in Colorado varies according to the person who is applying . Some companies are better at older ages ; some are better for couples . Some are better for -LRB- or are the only ones that will take -RRB- certain health conditions . Some offers certain features at a lower price than others . To find the cheapest long term care insurance for you , contact an agency that sells a variety of long term care companies in Colorado and review your health and all the features offered with a knowledgeable agent . Together , you can work out which has the lowest price for what you qualify for and what you need .
You can find the cheapest auto insurance at your agents office . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy with adequate limits that pays damages that result from an accident . Since this can involve personal injury and property damage , the amount can increase rapidly . Your agent will listen to you , offer sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . When you have a claim , you will be happy that you have the cheapest insurancethe one that pays !
The cheapest life insurance policy is the one that you already own . The cheapest life insurance policy you can buy is one that is scheduled to expire the day after you die . The fact is that the cheapest life insurance policy is always the one that is in force on the day that you die . If that is your concern work with a good life insurance agent . The agent can match your needs with a policy that will fit into your budget . Remember that when you save money on the premium and the policy expires before you die ; it is your loved ones that pay the price .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Symbol 10 In Auto Insurance ?
Symbols are used to designate various types of auto coverage on a business auto policy . They range from 1-9 and 19 for business auto , 21-31 for garage keepers coverage , 41-50 and 59 for truckers , and 61-71 and 79 for motor carriers . For example , symbol 1 refers to `` Any Auto '' and is the broadest designation , allowing the coverage for any automobile an insured my find the need to drive . Symbol 10 is one of the ` custom ' symbols , meaning the use of the vehicle has a meaning that has been modified from one of the standard symbol designations for that class of vehicles . In these cases , the auto in question does not fit 100 % into one of the standard symbol designations , so the insured and the insurer agree to a custom definition of use .
Symbols are used to designate various types of auto coverage on a business auto policy . They range from 1-9 and 19 for business auto , 21-31 for garage keepers coverage , 41-50 and 59 for truckers , and 61-71 and 79 for motor carriers . For example , symbol 1 refers to `` Any Auto '' and is the broadest designation , allowing the coverage for any automobile an insured my find the need to drive . Symbol 10 is one of the ` custom ' symbols , meaning the use of the vehicle has a meaning that has been modified from one of the standard symbol designations for that class of vehicles . In these cases , the auto in question does not fit 100 % into one of the standard symbol designations , so the insured and the insurer agree to a custom definition of use .
Every year , make and model of automobile that a particular company is willing to insure has a symbol that determines the rating factors that are going to be applied . The symbol is the result of company experience and industry experience . If a car has a history of high repair costs it will be assigned a high symbol , regardless of the appearance or name you give the vehicle . Cars with low weight and high horsepower -LRB- sports cars -RRB- generally have high repair costs and a high symbol . Cars with expensive parts can also be assigned a high symbol .
Every year , make and model of automobile is assigned a specific symbol . The symbols are alphabetical . The symbol tracks the experience the industry and the company have with that particular year , make and model . As you can imagine a manufacturer like Mercedes Benz has a wide variety of symbols . The symbol is but a part of the computation of the premium . The insurance companies in California are restricted to a few criteria to further evaluate the risk . The California insurers will look at the driving record of every driver in the household and will assess points if there are violations present , particularly with the assigned driver . The points based upon a drivers record have a compounding effect because in California a driver with less than two points is considered a good driver and awarded a substantial discount . Another factor that influences the company is the presence of inexperienced drivers . The accident record of the household is also considered closely . Claims for bodily injury receive a great deal of scrutiny . Most points given for accidents or violations remain on the driving record for three years . Racing and DUI convictions remain on the record for ten years . In California the distance you driver your Mercedes Benz each year is also a part of the computation . Services are available to insurance companies that track your mileage every time the vehicle is serviced . These services project you annual mileage and companies use bands of factors to develop the final premium . There are a few additional factors considered such as location where the car is being garaged , and occupation of the drivers in the household , Most automobile insurance is rated by a computer with little additional input from a live underwriter or agent . All of this information is used to compile a premium that the insurance company considers adequate for the risk . If approved by the computer , the agent is authorized to issue the policy and subject to potential additional review , the policy is in force .
Every vehicle insured as a private passenger vehicle has a symbol . That symbol represents the insurance companys experience with similar vehicles . The symbol represents the average costs of repairs that type of vehicle during a specified period of time . The symbol is closely linked to the cost of the vehicle but can be altered if the vehicle is difficult to repair or has an unusual frequency of incidents .
There is a symbol assigned to every car by make , model and equipment . As the car becomes older the symbol is influenced by the market price . The car symbol is used to compute the premium . A restored or modified car may be more valuable than the stock model . In that case the owner might want to have the insurance written for a stated value .
Each automobile is assigned a symbol based upon its year , make and model . The symbol reflects the anticipated cost of paying claims on that vehicle . Vehicles with a high horsepower to weight ratio tend to have a higher incident of claims than 4 door sedans with 4 cylinder automatic engines . This approach tries to make the collection of premium reflect the actual cost of insuring a particular car .
Vehicles are given price group symbols which is a number that works as a rating factor forvehicles These numbers are based in large part on performance and how well a vehicle does in an accident and the costs that may potentially follow . I 'm pretty sure performance is not an issue with a smart car but while I do not know for certain my experience tells me anytime a smart car is in an accident it 's probably a total . Since the car has not been out for a real long time experience may change symbol of the vehicle .
Every vehicle has an assigned symbol . That symbol is based on the average cost of claims for that particular vehicle . Occasionally that symbol will change as there is increased claims experience . That symbol is part of the formula that determines the rate charged for your particular vehicle . An insurance agent can give you specific information .
Car insurance group N is a rating for vehicles in Britain . It typically is referring to a car that is fairly high-performance and probably expensive to insure . Here in the US , we use -LRB- almost all carriers -RRB- different types of rating . Symbols are often assigned to the vehicle you are insuring , which is one factor that helps determine the rate .
Start a percentage of profit in a savings account this might take sometime but will pay off later in being self employed means you like the freedom that comes with it . Do n't borrow money in most cases you are making enough money to run your business and live . So live below your means get help to evaluate where you are at you can get this help free most consultants or financial planners will get paid from the carrier not you . Dividend stocks and IUL life policies are good in this case and will help you earn tax free money later . I would invest in Land they are not making any more . Just say for example Hersey stock symbol -LRB- hsy -RRB- is a world dominator and has paid dividends as high as 7 dollars per share which a 10k dollar investment now could pay dividends of say 7-10k 15 years from now .
Full coverage is base a lot of different factors . Year , Make , Model your personal info as to where you live -LRB- zip code -RRB- , age how long you been licensed , tickets or accidents within the last 40 months , any other additional house hold members with licenses or permits . The biggest one specially in NY is credit . I would advice you to go to your local DMV ask for your drivng record and bring it to a couple of different agent and make sure you have a Vin number for the vehicle your looking to insure . If your looking at different vehicle 's remember all vehicles have different symbols . The price for full coverage on a 2014 Camaro is not the same for 2014 Honda Accord . Thank you and good luck .
You should buy life insurance from a place you trust . If on a website , look to see if they are part of the Better Business Bureau , have a TRUSTe designation , or other symbols that show they are reputable and secure . Look at how long the agency has been in business , if they have legitimate contact information , and are willing to introduce you to any of their staff . Testimonials can be most telling , especially if they do not sound contrived but are actual statements from actual clients . It is helpful to use agencies that carry multiple products and carriers so that you do not have to spend all your time shopping . When a health condition is involved , it saves much discouragement to use an agent or website that specializes in that health condition , or impaired risk life insurance as a whole .
Insurance `` groups '' are typically used by insurers in the UK . You can contact your agent or the insurance company directly and find out the group of your vehicle . Her in the US , often cars are given symbols for rating purposes . You can also contact your broker or carrier to determine the symbol , which determines the risk of the car/truck .
A 10 year life insurance policy means you have a policy providing you with 10 years of coverage , a death benefit . In most cases the premium is guaranteed for the initial 10 years . After 10 years , the policy may revert to an annual renewable meaning the premium is not guaranteed . Please so your homework before purchasing a 10 year life insurance policy . I run into people all the time who have a 10 year where they are near the end of the term and need more or longer coverage . Look at a longer term , up to 30 years and lock in your premium for that term . ; It all comes down to what you are trying to accomplish . If your goal is for only 10 years or less , then this policy maybe perfect for your needs .
NO they can not force you to have renters insurance but they can choose to not rent to you if you do not get renters insurance . Most renters policies are on average $ 100 a year depending on your state that is with 40K worth of coverage on your contents and 100K in liability coverage . It is well worth the cost and in many cases if you bundle it with your auto insurance it lowers your auto insurance I have seen in many cases it lowered your auto insurance 10 a month and the renters insurance is less then 10 a month so this puts you ahead . Contact a local independent agent and they can help you muddle through what works best for you
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
10 year term life insurance means that the policy will stay the same price for 10 years , then either end , or jump way up in price . Some policies offer a rider to extend the policy beyond 10 years at an additional cost . Normally , after the 10 years of a 10 year term life insurance policy are up , the insured person must apply for a new policy at rates appropriate to their older age and health at that time . Or else they may be able to convert their policy to permanent insurance before the 10 year term ends . The permanent insurance is guaranteed to have the same health rating as the term did , and priced according to the age of the insured at the time of conversion .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Collision is a defined term in the Personal Auto Policy , so there is not a lot of debate about what collision means . According my copy of the Personal Auto Policy published by The Insurance Service Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- , Form PP 00 01 01 05 , Part D - Coverage For Damage To Your Auto , Paragraph B. . . Collision means the upset of your covered auto or a non-owned auto or their impact with another vehicle or object . Loss caused by the following is considered other than collision : 1 . Missiles or falling objects ; 2 . Fire ; 3 . Theft or larceny ; 4 . Explosion or earthquake ; 5 . Windstorm ; 6 . Hail , water or flood ; 7 . Malicious mischief or vandalism ; 8 . Riot or civil commotion ; 9 . Contact with bird or animal ; or 10 . Breakage of glass . If breakage of glass is caused by a collision , you may elect to have it considered a loss caused by collision . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
end question
start question
health-insurance
Who Can Help Me With Health Insurance ?
When your thinking about health insurance there are two options currently available to you for help . The first , which I recommend , is working with an agent who is a health broker , who is also certified on your states Health Exchange system . Talking with a broker will help you to understand what all your options within the different insurance companies . The second is to contact the exchange directly and work through there system . You are not able to establish a relationship with the people you call in to help so it will be difficult to really find the best match . I am not saying you ca n't do it , but rather you are more on your own to navigate around the site and to choose the company that will best meet YOUR needs . Good Luck .
I am a health insurance broker in South Carolina and am now engaged in helping people understand Obamacare and their options . Because of the Affordable Care Act the options a consumer has are many less than before the act was made law . There are alternative if the premiums are too high and I would be happy to help anyone that needs it with no obligaton .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
It can vary . The team and/or league organization may offer some format of group health coverage for all its players or they may secure individual health plans . Since professional athletes endure a higher level of physical strain than the average person due to the constant training , practice , games , and other physical activities , they may require supplemental coverage programs in addition to your common type of health plans such as injury specific plans . If you 're looking for help with your coverage , it 's best to consult with a health insurance agent who has a strong background in health programs specifically geared towards health insurance plans . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I always recommend using an independent insurance agent who can compare multiple insurance companies instead of just one carrier . Agents who work for a specific carrier are known as `` captive agents '' and must apply through that carrier before they can look at other companies -LRB- and usually they can only look at other carriers if they were declined by the first company -RRB- . There 's no extra cost to using an independent agent versus calling the carrier directly and you get all of the added services at no charge -LRB- instead of getting a random customer service representative to try to answer your questions . Through an agent , you can speak with the same person for all your questions and get any input that you need . Applying through an agent can save you tons of time , aggravation , and frustration through the application process - and of course , they can save you a lot of money by determining for you which insurance company may offer the coverage at the lowest possible cost . Often times when you try to ask 10 different people for help , you can have too much information thrown at you and the process can become confusing . When you 're looking for coverage , stick with an agent who you feel is knowledgeable , experienced , and will help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and which carrier will offer it at the lowest possible cost based on your medical history . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
Yes this can be accomplished . I can help get your policy set up . Send me an email via the `` contact me '' button or call me -LRB- my contact information is on my agent profile page -RRB- . My agency represents over 50 companies and are licensed in over 35 states so we can shop the case to a large number of carriers to make sure that the program being set up will offer it at the lowest cost . I also wanted to clarify as you indicate `` per person '' in your question , are you looking for one policy with a face amount of $ 12,000,000 with multiple beneficiaries or multiple policies for a greater amount ? The cost of any policy will depend on a number of things - the risk classification is the most important factor as it determines the premiums for the policy . The risk classification is determined by the medical history - your gender , height/weight profile , any medications , any major medical conditions , family medical history , the results of the medical exam , any use of tobacco products , and other factors . Please note , with a $ 12,000,000 life insurance policy , the process may involve a reinsurance company and the carrier will likely ask for a financial questionnaire to make sure that the desired figure for the coverage is suitable to your income level and the financial need is justifiable . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help getting the policy in place and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Hi Mike . To become a Medicare expert , you 've got ta read , read , and read some more . There are a lot of parts to it , but they can be learned . What type of Medicare coverage are you looking to sell ? Medigap ? Medicare Advantage ? Part D. MA & Part D programs require AHIP certification and then each carrier requires their own training course . I can help get you contracted for Medicare and LTC carriers via the brokerages I use . I hope the information is helpful - if I can be of help , send me an email or call me via the contact me button on my profile page and we can go over the input . Thanks very much .
From me , of course . If you are like most Americans shopping for health insurance is not only about as exciting as watching paint dry but you also find yourself in a world you do n't fully understand and where the people seem to speak a foreign language . Of course , you can always go online and shop around or , even more fun , go to HealthCare.Gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace and shop there . That works for some people but millions of others have learned the painful lesson that there are a lot of factors to consider when making a purchase as important as health insurance that are very difficult to present concisely on a web site . Seek out the services of a qualified life and health insurance agent . An independent agent not tied to one specific insurance company can shop the entire marketplace for you and can be impartial . An agent with additional professional certifications such as Chartered Benefits Consultant , Certified Employee Benefits Consultant , Registered Health Underwriter are examples of professionals who have taken their education and training beyond the simple requirements to get a life and health insurance license . These are the characteristics I would recommend you look for in a health insurance agent . It does n't cost you anything extra to get these professional 's services and they do all the work , can answer your questions , and point out those not so obvious issues with provider networks , how your specific medical and/or prescription needs are covered by different plans that the average consumer often misses or does n't even know to ask about . ObamaCare has not made all health insurance policies equal , quite the opposite in fact . Ask your friends or co-workers , do an Internet search for health insurance agents , or contact me . But you 'll be glad that you got professional guidance on this matter .
The same as it will be if you have a job . Under the affordable care act , you may be able to qualify for a subsidy to reduce your monthly premiums . If you qualify for a subsidy , you will want to look at health plans on the health insurance exchanges - subsidies can not be applied to plans off the exchanges . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced health insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine which plan will be most suitable to your specific needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
About 44 million people did not have health insurance prior to the Affordable Care Act . Since the new program began , over 7 million people have signed up for health insurance through the exchanges . Health plans are now `` guaranteed-issue '' as insurance companies can no longer decline you for a pre-existing condition or other health-related illness . Some people will still not have health insurance because many may choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage since the premiums for new plans are higher than the older plans , given the increase in benefits provided in each plan -LRB- the 10 essential health benefits required under each plan plus anything above and beyond it , varying by carrier -RRB- . If you have any questions about health insurance or would like help with your own coverage , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button - my direct contact information is available on my profile page .
For me , selling life insurance is a little like finding a high quality piece of clothing for my customers on the discount rack . I love getting them the best value possible for their particular age and health details , while still getting them a good policy that will be secure and not go up in price . I will put in many hours to help them get the coverage they need at an affordable price , even if they have a challenging health situation or other risk . That brings me great fulfillment and has helped me make some wonderful friends , even though I rarely meet them face to face .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
It 's a website marketplace where individuals and small groups can shop for and buy their health insurance plans . Each state had the option of implementing their own state-run exchange or let the federal government handle a state 's health insurance exchange . You can also use the exchanges to help you determine whether or not you qualify for a subsidy that can help you lower the cost of your insurance premiums or if you are eligible for Medicaid . Even though you CAN do it on your own , it 's always advisable to consult with an experienced health insurance broker who can guide you through the process and make sure everything is in good order and that your coverage is in force -LRB- a critical point considering all of the technical issues people have encountered with the roll-out of the new programs -RRB- . There is a ton of information to sift through and comparing plans can be very difficult and time consuming . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Does State Farm Offer Long Term Care Insurance ?
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance , but not in every state . Their Long Term Care policies and Partnership Long Term Care policies offer options for home health , hospice , and respite care in addition to nursing home and other institutional care . Benefits can be purchased up to $ 500 per day .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
State Farm does not offer private Short Term Disability Insurance . At this time , the only carriers that I am aware of that offer that type of coverage are Mutual of Omaha and Assurity . State Farm does offer long term Disability Income Insurance , Mortgage Disability Income Insurance , Individual Credit Disability Insurance , and Group Disability Insurance .
Yes , State Farm does offer life insurance . However , I have some clients who bought State Farm life insurance and then ended up buying different policies because they were much less expensive . Shopping for life insurance with an independent agent like myself gives you access to over 70 A rated or better life insurance companies . Many of these life insurance companies offer policies less expensive than State Farm and they may be less restrictive when it comes to certain health conditions . If you use State Farm for your other insurance needs , I would highly recommend you shop your life insurance with an independent agent because you will most likely save a significant amount of money .
Yes , State Farm does offer Long Term Disability Insurance under the name , `` Disability Income Insurance '' . State Farm also offersMortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance . You would need to contact a State Farm agent to apply for this coverage .
State Farm does have Disability Insurance that it offers for purchase . Their plans include regular Disability Insurance that pays a benefit to the disabled person to be used as they wish , which State Farm calls Disability Income Insurance . State Farm also offers Mortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance .
Yes , the Farm Bureau does offer life insurance . You can contact your state Farm Bureau to find an agent . Or you can get a quote via the internet from United Home Life , of whom the parent company is United Farm Family Life Insurance Co , which operates as a subsidiary of the Indiana Farm Bureau . UHL provides life insurance in most states .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
No , Long Term Care Insurance is not required in Nebraska , or in any other state . Not everyone can afford to pay the premiums for Long Term Care Insurance , and Medicaid exists for those who are unable to afford the expense of living in a skilled nursing facility . However , many people in Nebraska choose to purchase Long Term Care Insurance so that they can protect assets -LRB- protecting the family farm is a big incentive to purchase Long Term Care Insurance in Nebraska -RRB- . They also purchase Long Term Care Insurance so that they have the freedom to spend the benefit at the place of their choice , be that home health , assisted living , nursing home , or other .
In Wisconsin Rural Mutual Insurance Company which is a part of Farm Bureau Financial Services offers renters insurance . I can only speak for Wisconsin , but Farm Bureau Financial Services does operate in other states within the United States and handles personal lines with other companies in those states . If you are in Wisconsin give me a call and I can try to help you with coverage if you are not in Wisconsin , then I would suggest contacting your local Farm Bureau office to ask them for a local agent .
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
State Farm does sell annuities in most states . Check with a local agent to make sure they are available in your state . To learn about State Farms annuity products go to their website WEBSITELINK It looks like they offer three products . Future Wealth Builder , Future Income Plus , and Guaranteed Income .
State Farm offers home insurance in most US states , but may not beselling new policies inevery state . For example , due to the risk of catastrophic claims costs from hurricanes , State Farm does not sell new home insurance policies in Florida.Contacta local State Farm agent , and they can let you know if State Farm home insuranceis available in your state .
Farm Bureau does not underwrite and issue health insurance under their own brand name . But in some states Farm Bureau may have a marketing arrangement with health insurance carriers allowing their agents to offer health insurance to Farm Bureau policyholders . This type of arrangement is not unusual and widely used by multi-line carriers .
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance , but not in every state . Their Long Term Care policies and Partnership Long Term Care policies offer options for home health , hospice , and respite care in addition to nursing home and other institutional care . Benefits can be purchased up to $ 500 per day .
Currently , the largest US auto insurance company is State Farm , assuming we use written premiums as the criteria . State Farm has offices throughout the US . Following State Farm is Warren Buffet 's Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- Geico and other companies -RRB- , Allstate , Progressive , Farmers and USAA . Of course , these rankings change fairly often . In fact , Berkshire just recently passed Allstate for the Number 2 position . Many local companies in your area may not be the biggest carriers , but still write a lot of local business . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
State Farm is a good company , and their term life insurance is good . Like every other insurance company , State Farm has people they can not insure , and people who will get good prices with them . You can go to a website to compare quotes from other companies to the State Farm quote you have . Be sure that you are comparing the same term length and the rating for which you qualify . You might qualify for a different health rating with different companies . An agent can pinpoint that for you .
Yes , State Farm offers term life insurance . You can contact a State Farm agent to get a quote . If you would like to compare their term quotes to quotes from other companies , be sure to compare the same terms , and check to see that all the guarantees are the same .
Those who need to buy long term care insurance are those who have assets that they wish to leave their heirs , such as farms , substantial investments , or commercial real estate . However , those with great wealth may wish to fund their own long term care . Some people buy long term care to keep their families from having to worry about them , or to ensure that they will have a say in the type of care they get .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Commission Does A Life Insurance Agent Make ?
It depends on the company and type of policies . I have seen commissions as low as 35 % an as high as 110 % . Commissions are paid out of a fund from the insurance company , not directly by the consumer . Out of those commissions the agent has to pay for marketing , phone , gas for his automobile , and other business expenses . Most agents do not receive a salary or expense reimbursement .
How much commission does a life insruance agent make ? Commissions vary by type of product sold and by state sold in . There is a wide range of payouts from 0 % -LRB- yes , there are products that do n't pay a commission -RRB- to upwards of 120 % for the first year . After the first year , in many cases no further commission is earned .
Not all life insurance agents are paid the same . But as a general rule 100 % of the first year premiums go to commissions . If an agent works for a company that supplies him with an office and advertising , he will usually make 50 % of the first year commission and the company or agency makes the other 50 % to recoup their overhead . If the agent is an independent broker , he will be paid the entire 100 % but must pay all his own business expenses .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
How much commission does a life insruance agent make ? Commissions vary by type of product sold and by state sold in . There is a wide range of payouts from 0 % -LRB- yes , there are products that do n't pay a commission -RRB- to upwards of 120 % for the first year . After the first year , in many cases no further commission is earned .
Life insurance agents make money through commissions on the products they sell . If Term insurance , these commissions are usually paid for the first year , then sometimes there is a very small residual commission earned annually after that . If the policy is dropped in the first 6-12 months , commissions are often withdrawn back from the agent . Permanent policies usually have a small recurring commission annually , which is how many life insurance agents are able to supplement Social Security income during retirement .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
An auto insurance agent can make MILLIONS of dollars if he can sell MILLIONS of policies covering MILLIONS of automobiles ... . No , actually , like most insurance products ... an agent 's income is based on commission sales . The more policy count an agent can sell , the more commission he/she should be able to make . And now you wonder ... what commission percentage should an agent make ? Well , that depends on the deals you can work out with your companies and/or MGAs . Then , depending on your State laws ... you may or may NOT be able to charge additional fees ... but that is a completely different questions to be answered .
Agents that are hired by an agency may be paid a salary by that agency . Agents that sell independently , or in an agency that pays according to production , get paid commission . The sale of a life insurance policy will pay the agent a commission if the policy is retained for up to a year . Some policies will pay a `` residual '' commission -LRB- much smaller than first year commission -RRB- for each year the insured person keeps the policy .
Most life insurance policies pay a commission to the agent who sold the policy . The commission is usually a percent of the `` commissionable premium '' . The commissionable part of the premium may or may not exclude policy fees , and with universal life there is a target premium beyond which no commission is paid . The commission is usually paid within a month after the policy is placed , although some companies pay faster than others . If the insured drops the policy during the first year , some or all the commission may be charged back from the agent and returned to the life insurance company .
Life insurance brokers are paid a % of the commissionable premium of the life insurance policies they place . Each life insurance carrier and product pays differently , and agents are paid on different schedules set by the general agencies they use . For Term Life insurance , the commission is usually paid only on the first year premium , and if the policy lapses before the year ends , the broker may lose some or all of the commission . For Permanent policies and some Term policies , a small residual commission is paid to agent for years after the first year 's commission is paid . Of course , some agents work for brokers and are simply paid a salary .
When a Term policy is sold , the insurance company pays out from 50 % to over 100 % of the first year premium for commissions . With Term insurance , if there are any commissions paid after the first year , they are very small . Permanent insurance pays out a residual commission each year that the policy is in effect . It should be noted that it is not just the agent who gets the commission paid by the carrier . If there is a general agency/brokerage involved -LRB- as there usually is -RRB- , they get a cut . If the agent works for an agency or office , they will probably get a cut . So what the agent earns depends on whether he/she is independent and/or works directly with the carrier , or whether he/she is part of a team that places the policy and shares the commission .
That 's a great question ! An insurance agent most often works off of a payment that is made to them when they sell a policy or product for the company - called a commission . These commissions can be fairly sizable , or very small , depending upon the sale . Therefore , in most cases , the earnings of the insurance agent depend entirely upon their ability to sell , and the product commission that is paid upon the sale . I believe the vast majority of agents will tailor the right product to the needs of the client , but there will unfortunately always be a few that are more interested in commission than client . You are always wise to have an idea of what it is that you want , and if you feel pressured , to ask for time to think it over . Follow your instincts . If you were considering a career as an agent , be aware that the start up period can be really lean until you 've gotten your client base built , and you may need to have another source of income , especially if you were accustomed to a steady paycheck . Once you get rolling , if you are motivated , honest , and good with your clients , you can make a very comfortable living . Anything I can do to help , I 'm happy to - feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Life insurance agents are almost always commission salespeople . Agents that work exclusively for one carrier may draw a small base salary , but the industry is designed on a pay-for-performance model . If you ask an agent that same question you 'll find that most treat their practice as a small business regardless of who they sell for . I think you 'll find most of the agents that contribute answers on Insurance Library are independent insurance agents and 100 % commission representatives . In my opinion , that 's a huge advantage for consumers , because the agents interests are aligned with the consumers . Sell the right policy the first time so the consumer keeps it and the agent gets commissioned for it .
The short answer is it depends . There are many factors that goes into a life insurance agents paid commissions . There are different commission rates with different carriers . The main factor is how hard the agent works . If he or she writes a lot of business , then they will make a high 6 figure income and some make 7 figures . If they are not hard working aggressive folks then they will make a low 5 figure income or fail all together . It is a great living for the person with a good work ethic , high morals and character and the willingness to learn constantly .
Life insurance agents in Vermont make a wide range of salaries . As with any other business that pays commission -LRB- and usually , commission only -RRB- , the amount of work put into the career makes a big difference . But it also depends on the economy , how many people you know , whether you have the money to stick with it for a while , etc. . If there is an average , most agents in Vermont probably do not make it , but earn far less or far more than that .
It 's going to depend on the type of coverage and the payout offered by the insurance carrier . The state where a policy is sold may also have some restrictions on how much commission is paid out at one time . A commission is paid to an agent `` after '' a premium has been paid and is in good standing from the insurance carrier . Commissions depending on the product can be paid for just one year or several at a lower amount each year , depending on the company .
I agree with Barry on this one , especially since there is not cost to the consumer to use an agent . You will not pay extra in your insurance premium if you choose to use an agent in the process . All insurance rates are set by the insurance commissioner in each state and can not be changed to include a fee for using an agent . Some agents may choose to charge a fee , instead of taking the insurance commission offered by the insurance company for their services , but they may not take both . So feel free to get some free advice , education and knowledge on these complicated and changing insurance plans . If you do n't you may end up on a plan that does not include your doctor because your Doctor told you he `` takes '' that insurance ... when in reality he only is on one of the insurance companies networks , not all 3 . Use the knowledge of an educated health insurance agent to make an informed decision on your health insurance ... it 's one of the most important decisions you will make to protect your family . I believe the same with Life Insurance . Make sure to glean from an educated life insurance agent before making a `` wrong '' choice . There are so many new options out there that bare further review such a the Indexed Universal Life Insurance plans where you can accumulate cash with a good rate of return and no downside risk of the market . Gaining knowledge is always a good thing ... ask the experts !
In my opinion , you 're asking the wrong question . If you contact ten different companies , you 'll get ten different rates for the same coverage . That does n't mean the one with the higher premium is n't as good a program . It might have the best provisions for your particular situation . Besides , every company will tell you that they have the best product . The question you should be asking is `` Do I have an agent who I trust to do the best thing for me and my family ? '' Every situation is different and a good agent will have the resources to find the best combination of programs that fits yours . It may be all whole life or no whole life or some combination of different programs . I would begin by asking questions and finding out how much you need , how long you need it for , and your budget . The program you begin with will , most likely , change as you get older and your circumstances change . Be smart and find a good agent who cares more about your family than he/she does about their next commission check . Then , listen to them , and do what they recommend . You and your family will be much better off .
How much does a Life Insurance Agent make in their first year ? Well it 's a range from a huge debt to a huge profit . There is a 90 % failurerate in the first two years for life agents . Usually life insurance sales is a commission only occupation and an agent will make what they 've earned through their work . Even in situations where advances are provided , failure in the business can turn those advances into a `` loan '' that must be repaid . If someone is considering a job in insurance sales they need to realize it is aprofession that requires a lot of work andeffort.No one `` gives '' you anything and it is not aseasy as it looks .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Air Conditioner Leaks ?
A leaking air conditioner may only be covered by homeowners insurance in the following 2 circumstances : 1 . If the air conditioning unit 's leak was caused by a covered peril -LRB- i.e. fire , vandalism , wind etc. . . -RRB- 2 . If the homeowners insurance policy has an Equipment Breakdown -LRB- home warranty -RRB- Endorsement affording coverage for the air conditioning system . Most carriers do not offer the equipment breakdown endorsement on a homeowners policy but it is worth asking your local agent or broker if one is available .
It depends on why the air conditioner is leaking , but probably not . Home insurance is n't designed to cover normal wear and tear and breakdown of equipment , which is likely the cause of a leak from an air conditioner . Water damage typically has to be caused by sudden and accidental pipe bursting to be covered under your homeowners policy , but coverage varies by company , so check with your agent or broker .
A leaking air conditioner may only be covered by homeowners insurance in the following 2 circumstances : 1 . If the air conditioning unit 's leak was caused by a covered peril -LRB- i.e. fire , vandalism , wind etc. . . -RRB- 2 . If the homeowners insurance policy has an Equipment Breakdown -LRB- home warranty -RRB- Endorsement affording coverage for the air conditioning system . Most carriers do not offer the equipment breakdown endorsement on a homeowners policy but it is worth asking your local agent or broker if one is available .
It depends on why the air conditioner is leaking , but probably not . Home insurance is n't designed to cover normal wear and tear and breakdown of equipment , which is likely the cause of a leak from an air conditioner . Water damage typically has to be caused by sudden and accidental pipe bursting to be covered under your homeowners policy , but coverage varies by company , so check with your agent or broker .
Based on the question I have to make assumptions that your old air conditioner just wore out and broke down . If this is the case then no , your homeowners insurance will not cover to get you a new air conditioner . Homeowners insurance polices are not warranties or maintenance policies . This includes mechanical breakdown . Damage must be sudden and accidental . Fire , or vandalism would fall into the sudden and accidental category .
The air conditioner is a part of a residence . Damage to the air condition from one of the perils stated in the policy will be repaired by the insurance company . This does not apply to the air conditioner requiring repair from normal usage . There are policies available to cover home appliances .
If the air conditioner is damaged by a covered peril then it may be covered under your homeowners insurance . If it simply breaks down then it is not . For example , lightning strikes your air conditioner , a tree falls on it , a fire destroys it , there is coverage . Your child decides to put a stick in the running fan and damages it or it simply stops working due to age or normal wear and tear , there is no coverage .
An air conditioner would not be covered under a regular renters insurance policy under normal circumstances . If the air conditioner was damaged due to a covered loss then the damage may be covered less your deductible . Read your policy completely to know what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Homeowners policies cover damages sustained to the residence and personal property from named perils . Mechanical breakdown is not a named peril in very many , if any homeowners insurance policies . If the property is burned and the air conditioner is damaged , then it would be covered .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
If you have the right type of homeowners coverage , this question would be easier to answer . The right type of homeowners coverage would cover your property , both real property -LRB- your home , garage , built in pools , etc. -RRB- and personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture , dishes , yard fixtures , things you could take with you if you moved -RRB- for damage unless there is a specific exclusion or limitation in the policy that says it doesnt . I dont think you will find a specific exclusion or limitation for a pool leak but you will find one that says damage caused by wear and tear or deterioration , or inherent vice would not be covered . So the issue would be , why did the pool leak ? If the liner simply wore out from age or there was a defect , you probably wont be covered . But if neither of these apply ; you may find coverage for the damage . Unfortunately , most people dont have the right homeowners policy . Their policies limit coverage on personal property -LRB- such as above ground pools -RRB- to specific named perils . I call these the wrong kind of homeowners policies . If you have this type of policy , you must show the insurance company the damage was caused by one of the named perils . A pool leak is not a named peril . Under that type of policy , I think you are going to be out of luck .
The actual pipes -LRB- Plumbing -RRB- from leaking or bursting is excluded on a homeowners policy . However the damage the burst caused the dwelling could be covered . In the case of a leak coverage would be more difficult to determine if the leak has been occurring over a long period of time . A water main is usually away from the house so the chances of damage to the dwelling are low . The big question to ask is `` Was there any damage to the dwelling '' ? . If there is no damage to the dwelling you can immediately figure out there is no claim to be made . Leaks in general are just part of common maintenance of a homeowner . Always contact to agent to discuss the details of your particular situation to help determine if there is coverage for a water main leak .
Air Conditioning Units are covered under Homeowners Insurance policies for the perils afforded against by the policy ; i.e. Fire , Wind , Hail , Vandalism etc. . . If the question is regarding repairs and maintenance , the unit would be covered either by a Manufacturer 's Service Contract or a Home Warranty Policy and not your Home Insurance Policy . Homeowners Insurance is designed to protect the home against covered perils to assist the homeowner from financial loss ; it is not designed as a repairs and warranty policy for appliances and general upkeep . Home Warranty policies are available for appliances and repairs of systems in homes ; the homeowner would have to pay a premium for the warranty policy and each service visit would be covered after a deductible which would be agreed upon on the policy .
According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , air purifiers are not covered by Medicare . They are listed as follows : Air Cleaners - Deny - environmental and control equipment ; not primarily medical in nature -LRB- 1861 -LRB- n -RRB- of the Act -RRB- However , some air purifier websites state that it may be possible to get reimbursement for their air purifiers by Medicare if you submit the doctor 's order prescribing it . You can try it , but I would not count on it when making your purchase .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Homeowners Insurance policies generally do cover ceiling leaks ; however , one must be cautious on this topic . Primarily , we must discover the cause of loss and make sure that the cause of loss is one of the covered perils on the policy . We must be certain that there were no exclusions on the policy -LRB- i.e. Roof Leaking Exclusion -RRB- . In few situations , a carrier may be willing to insure a home knowing that the roof is not in good condition , it has been known for few carriers to accept a roof exclusion and in this case , the policy would not cover leaks as a result of the known and exluded condition . If the loss is covered , items that will affect the payout of the claim would be Depreciation -LRB- if the policy is not a replacement cost policy -RRB- and the selected Deductible which will be deducted from the final payout ! For information on a homeowners policy , please review the following : WEBSITELINK
Typically , air purifiers and related items such as humidifiers and electric air cleaners are not covered by Medicare . However , Medicare may be able to cover a humidifier , when medically necessary , if used with some forms of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . Under that scenario , I would suggest confirming with Medicare directly to see what would be necessary to meet those requirements . I do n't know how much they cost brand new , but if expense tolerance is a large concern and one is desired , there may be discount ones or pre-owned ones that may be available for a low price that is tolerable on websites such as amazon , ebay , etc. . I would suggest taking a look in those areas for an alternative way to save money on the purchase of an air purifier . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
A homeowners policy covers damage that are caused by perils . The perils are listed in the contract . If the shower is leaking because of damage caused by one of the perils , it should be covered . If the shower is leaking because of fair wear and tear , that is generally excluded . The homeowners policy does not cover routine maintenance items .
Most true major medical insurance plans cover emergency medical transport which would include both ground and air -LRB- helicopter -RRB- transport . Use of an air ambulance is usually a call made by onsite medical personnel , not at the request of the patient . One thing to keep in mind is this . Air transport is quite expensive -LRB- $ 7000 + -RRB- and often the transport company will be non-par -LRB- not in any network -RRB- .
end question
start question
health-insurance
When Does A Health Insurance Deductible Apply ?
A health insurance deductible applies immediately , except for qualifying preventive services . For example , consider a policy with a $ 1,000 individual deductible . The policy requires that the insured pay the first $ 1,000 of medical expenses out-of-pocket directly to the healthcare providers . After the insured satisfies the deductible the plan begins reimbursing qualified medical expenses . The insured may still be responsible for paying any co-payment , and/or co-insurance .
A health insurance deductible is the amount you pay before a specific claim is paid . It does not apply to all benefits , and different deductibles are available . Typically , the deductible is between $ 500 and $ 2,500 although there are both higher and lower options . An HMO often does not have a deductible to meet . Once you have satisfied the deductible requirements , only a coinsurance may apply . Keep in mind that preventive benefits are usually not subject to the deductible and often office visits and prescriptions are subject to copays only . As experienced brokers , part of our job is to find the best plans at the lowest available rates that meet your budget and include a deductible that is acceptable to you .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
HDHP stands for High Deductible Health Plan . Generally , this term has been used in association with a type of health insurance policy purchased that was specifically designed to be used with a Health Savings Account -LRB- H.S.A -RRB- . In this context the health insurance plan design has an upfront deductible that must be paid by the policyholder before any co-insurance cost sharing and/or copayments can be applied to the policy 's coverage . The IRS determines the minimum deductible and out-of-pocket maximums for H.S.A eligible high deductible health plans each year . For this reason the deductible associated with HDHPs changes over time . In 2014 the minimum individual deductible for a HDHP is $ 1250 , in 2015 it will increase to $ 1300 . Re-designs of health insurance plan benefits prompted by the Affordable Care Act have introduced new health insurance plans that have substantially higher deductibles that previously were most often associated with an H.S.A based plans . As such , the consumer must closely examine the detailed benefits summary of the health insurance plans they are considering . This is because there are plan designs now that certainly have a high deductible but they also have other benefit features like office visit or prescription copayments that disqualify them from being used with an H.S.A. . In short , you will be best served to seek out the services of a health insurance broker who is knowledgeable in these matters .
A deductible is the dollar amount you may be responsible for before specific benefits are paid . Typically , a deductible does NOT apply to preventive benefits on most plans . This is a result of the Affordable Care Act legislation that was recently passed . On many policies , a deductible may only apply to major medical expenses instead of office visits and prescriptions , when a smaller copay may apply -LRB- in lieu of a deductible -RRB- . There are many deductible options , as they usually range from $ 0 to about $ 6,350 per person . What deductible is best for your situation ? An experienced broker will compare available plans and guide you through the process of picking the ideal amount .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
Excellent question ! You essentially have 3 main variations on the theme when purchasing ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance ; 1 -RRB- Conventional plan designs with office visit & prescription copays and lower deductibles -LRB- pretty pricey these days -RRB- 2 -RRB- High deductible health insurance plans designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- or a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- - becoming more common . 3 -RRB- Plans that fall in between , here you may see a plan with office visit copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , plans with prescription copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , or plans with more moderate deductible levels with all services subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance requirements but that also do n't meet the IRS requirements for being an HSA eligible plan . Simple , right ? First , determine if the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use are in-network providers for the plan you are interested in . Second , review you health and your history of health care consumption . Your needs and usage at 27 will probably be much different than when you are 47 . Try to pick a plan that you believe will meet your needs in the coming year at the best value . Determine if the plan you are interested in allows for direct access to specialists or whether it requires you to be referred out by your primary care physician first . Neither approach is bad but you should understand how you are supposed to access care in order to maximize your benefits and minimize your costs . Ask what your coverage is when you are outside of your immediate area . Increasingly you may find that you only have emergency care outside of a plan 's `` service area '' or perhaps no coverage at all . Do you have special needs ? A chronic illness or injury that requires ongoing treatment or expensive prescription medication requires extra homework . For example , some health plan 's pharmacy benefits cover HIV/AIDS medications at the lowest level -LRB- to them , highest for you -RRB- possible . Finally , compare monthly premiums . The lowest monthly cost , while always attractive , many not really be the lowest annual cost for you once you factor in some or all of the issues I have pointed out above . It may be worth another $ 50 a month in premiums to have a prescription copay instead of a deductible of up to $ 6300 to meet before your expensive medication is covered .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
A tough question to answer because it is so subjective , what 's high to one person may quite acceptable to another . As 30 year insurance industry professional I would say that by the standards of 2014 , you are entering `` high deductible '' territory when your plan 's annual deductible exceeds $ 2000 for an individual . When many consumers hear the term high deductible it is often being used as another way of saying this is a health insurance plan designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . The model for this product being that the lower premiums for a high deductible health insurance plan with no copayment features will free up money to fund an HSA and hopefullyaccumulate a health care nest egg for a person 's retirement years . In 2014 the minimum deductible for an HSA based plan is $ 1250 and the maximum deductible is $ 6350 . With the advent of the Affordable Care Act 's -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- health insurance marketplaces in 2014 the consumer is now presented with a whole new array of health insurance plan designs that will certainly meet anyone 's definition of a high deductible plan but that may not be designed to be compatible with an HSA . Extra care and caution needs to be exercised by the consumer in the new world of health insurance and I would recommend seeking out the services of an experienced health insurance brokers in your marketplace to help you find the plan best suited to your needs and budget .
The deductible applies to a property loss . Once the amount of loss is determined the deductible is applied . For example if there was a fire in the kitchen and the damages reached $ 50,000 . The company would reimburse you for $ 49,000 if your deductible was $ 1,000 . If some of the loss was subject to limitations , this would then be applied and could further reduce the adjusted claim . For example if your loss include $ 20,000 in firearms and your policy had a limit of $ 2,000 , the settlement would be reduced an additional $ 18,000 . There isnt a deductible applied to liability claims in most homeowners policies .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
When you apply for a life insurance policy , the life insurance company will nearly always check your driving record , pharmacy record , and MIB , even if you are applying for a policy that does not require a life insurance exam . They are checking for a suspended license , numerous traffic tickets , DUI 's , medications , and past health conditions the showed up when you applied for insurance in the past . If you are required to take a life insurance exam , they will check your blood and urine for HIV , diabetes , cholesterol , liver disease , other health conditions , and the presence of nicotine or drug metabolites . They will also weigh and measure you , take your blood pressure and pulse , and depending on your age and amount you apply for , may check for heart disease through use of a resting EKG or stress test .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
Homeowner policies typically cover wind damage to insured property . However , policyholders need to determine the deductible that will be applied in the event of damage from wind . For example , in Florida where wind is a particular frequency concern , carriers assign higher deductibles that are applied at settlement of a loss caused by wind . It is not uncommon for a deductible that is twice or more of the amount of dwelling coverage deductible for damage from other types of loss causes . The wind deductible is usually a lot higher than your standard homeowner policy deductible . Check with your local independent agency for a review based on your needs and budget .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
If you are referring to true major medical insurance policies that are in compliance with the requirements of the health care reform law then the answer to your question is `` Yes '' . Now , how the particular health insurance policy you select actually covers doctor 's office visits will vary between both insurance plans offered by an insurance carrier and from one insurance carrier to another . You could have a plan with office visit copayments that apply immediately , office visits could be covered at the plan 's co-insurance level with no deductible applying , or all health care services , including doctor 's office visits , could be subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , the consumer 's experience could range from a copay of perhaps $ 20 for the office visit to paying 100 % of the costs if it is subject to the plan 's deductible . The bottom line is to do your homework and study the coverage details of the health insurance plan you are enrolling in . There is much more to consider about a health insurance policy than just its monthly premium cost .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Cheap Is Renters Insurance ?
Renters Insurance can be purchased for as little as $ 8/mo . . Make sure to purchase a policy with replacement cost for your belongings . The coverage typically adds 10 % -20 % to the policy cost , but it makes sure your belongings are replaced with a new item equivalent rather than being depreciated in value due to age .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Cheap Renters Insurance is available online ! In order to obtain the cheapest renters insurance , you would need to select the lowest available personal property coverage , the lowest available personal liability limit and the highest available deductible . For those mandated by contract to carry renters insurance and are not interested in purchasing renters insurance , this would be the cheapest way to go ! There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by customers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
Where we may find it difficult to define ` Best ' Renters Insurance ; we believe the best renters insurance would be the most comprehensive coverage for a competitive premium rate . We believe in most States , this coverage lies in the hands of Renters Insurance Online available through Stillwater Insurance Group . We have an Online Link for consumers to obtain a quote , choose options and purchase the insurance policy online . If the definition of ` Best ' is ` Cheapest ' ; the easiest method to generate a Cheap Renters Insurance quote is to select a low amount of coverage with a high deductible . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States at : WEBSITELINK
In order to buy Cheap Renters Insurance , it is helpful to understand your needs , desires and the rating structure of the Renters Insurance Policy . The lowest annual premium will be generated for the minimum Contents Coverage -LRB- Personal Property -RRB- available , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage -LRB- Usually $ 100,000 -RRB- and the maximum available Policy Deductible -LRB- varies from State to State -RRB- . If all 3 of the above items are met , you will generate the lowest premium quote possible . If the Renters Policy is required by a Landlord and you are not purchasing it on your own accord , it may be helpful to find out if the Landlord is requiring to be added to the policy as an ` Additional Insured ' and if so , it would be prudent to find out exactly how they would like their Name & Address to read on the policy endorsement . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If unclear about coverage , it is prudent to contact a licensed professional to answer your questions and assist you in purchasing the coverage you need .
By cheap I assume that you are referring to the premium . The cheap I like to think of is the cost when you have the claim and your company stands behind you and pays everything that you expected . Regardless of the premium , you will then know what cheap really means . A major property loss could take 100 years of premiums to pay for . Having correct coverage is the way to have the truly cheap homeowners policy , find an agent , one you can trust .
Good question but think about it we need to ask ourselves a few questions before we go cheap sometimes cheap is good we all need to be good stewards of our money so the questions we should ask if answered honestly will be an indicator . Do I eat good healthy food ? Do I drink alcohol ? Do I work out at least 20 minutes 2 times a week ? How is my spiritual life ? Then we can decide which policy fits my need it can be fairly cheap but you must answer the questions and have a good consultant that cares about you not the money the money will come when we serve the people .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! There is a reason why things are cheap . You buy a cheap car , you spend a lot on repairs . You buy cheap clothes , they rip or shrink . Term insurance is cheap because it has very few perks , like a whole life policy would . Your term policy will have no cash value , and will end at a specific time . Because there is no management of your cash involved , and the odds are great that the company will collect from you for years and not have to pay you anything , those policies can be sold very cheaply . About the only way that you can stack the odds back in your favor and get money out of your policy would be to get a `` return of premium '' policy or rider . For a larger premium payment , this allows you to receive back most of what you had paid into the policy . If you have questions , feel free to drop me a line , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
Have you seen that esurance TV commercial -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- ? Everybody wants CHEAP insurance and almost any insurance can give you CHEAP insurance ... . But the reality is that you get what you pay for . Renters insurance is probably the most affordable coverage that you can find and will probably cost you $ 15 / month for great coverage . Make sure your policy has replacement cost on contents and includes additional living expenses . Saving $ 5 / month could wind up costing you thousands of dollars if you have the wrong policy . Check with an independent insurance agent who can look at multiple carriers and see what policy is right for you .
You need renters insurance when you have something to loose . That something could be more than your stuff . It could be the reasonable rent you have . If there were a fire , and you had to leave for another apartment , you might have to pay more rent . LOSS OF USE is a coverage built in to the policy . If you have to leave your 2 bedroom , second floor apartment where you pay $ 500 a month because of a fire , you can move into a similar apartment and if that similar apartment cost more , LOSS OF USE will pay for the extra -LRB- above $ 500 -RRB- rent . It will not pay for you to move into a four bedroom penthouse apartment . That 's not similar . If a friend or someone else visits , goes to the bathroom and slips on the floor they could get injured ... badly . A renters policy includes two important coverages : MEDICAL PAYMENTS and BODILY INJURY LIABILITY . MEDICAL PAYMENTS would pay hospital or doctor expenses necessary to treat your friend . The limit is usually $ 1,000 but you can buy more and it 's cheap . If your friend gets a lawyer and sues you , BODILY INJURY LIABILIYT will pay for an attorney to defend you AND pay the damages if you lose . The limits generally start at $ 100,000 , but check the price for higher limits as it also is cheap . Finally , there is your stuff . Maybe it 's used and worn and you do n't think it 's worth a lot . But if you had to go out and buy EVERYTHING all over again , it would be expensive . You can buy insurance that will replace your old stuff with new stuff . You just have to make sure you have REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE . REMEMBER : Insurance does not cover everything for every imaginable kind of claim . There are limits and exclusions . They are generally the same from company to company . Find an agent you can talk to and ask questions . Good Luck Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers 877-414-2031 WEBSITELINK
Remember cheap does n't mean better . What you want to find is a reputable company AND cheap rates . Compare your coverages as well as the rates - this is what I tell my clients . Another thing to look at is who is selling you the cheap rates - do you have a 1-800 telemarketer to talk to or a Licensed Agent who knows exactly what 's covered in your state ?
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
Term life insurance is cheap because it only pays out if death occurs during that period of time . The lower the age , the lower the actuarial risk of passing away , the lower the price . To get a policy that will be assured to be there to the end of life , the premium may be reasonable , but not necessarily `` cheap '' . Knowing it will be there for your loved ones at the time of need can definitely make it worth the cost . That is not to say there is not a need for cheap term life insurance . Thankfully , both Term and Permanent policies are available so that coverage is available and affordable for nearly anyone who wants it .
As Peggy noted , it 's really cheap to buy life insurance on a newborn baby . The primary underwriting factor is the responses to yes or no health questions - there are no exam requirements for them because of their age -LRB- they 're babies ! -RRB- . Many parents look at buying a whole life policy because it 's very cheap and can be kept for life . A great rider to look at adding to a WL policy on a child is a guaranteed insurability option rider -LRB- GIO -RRB- - in short , this rider says that you can increase the face amount at certain intervals with no additional medical underwriting . Another option many parents consider is adding a child rider onto their own policy - this is a very cheap and easy way to add term coverage for your children . Let me know if I can be of further help . Thanks !
There are many carriers out there all can be quite `` Cheap '' But be careful when shopping for rates cheap does n't always mean you have the proper coverage . Also depends on what type of coverage you are looking for . When shopping online there are times that the rate is fantastic then you find out that they are not even allowed to sell insurance in your state . you also have to think about in the event of a claim can they be reached and you talk to someone local ? Buyer beware make you are covered properly like the old saying goes if it is to good to be true then most likely that is the case . However I do have some carries that I have a client in that has full coverage on a car and only $ 143 for 6 months of coverage with low deductible now that is cheap but her coverage is not . So the key is making sure you know what you are purchasing before you put the money out . A Local agent or the States insurance commissioners office can assist you in finding what you are looking for
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What insurance covers your car if an auto shop damage your engine ?
If your vehicle is damaged as a result of negligence by the body shop -LRB- or authorized dealership -RRB- , your auto insurance policy will not provide reimbursement for any out-of-pocket expenses you incur . Your best option is to work directly with the body shop/dealership that did the repair work an attempt to work out am amicable solution agreeable to both parties . Damage to the engine can be potentially very expensive , and perhaps render your vehicle unfit and unsafe to drive . Hiring an attorney may be your next-best recourse if the offending party is uncooperative . Important Note : This answer was provided by Ed Harris , one of the nation 's premier car insurance brokers . Carinsurancezoom.org is the leading US trusted authority for providing the best car insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Damage by an auto repair facility is not a covered peril of an auto insurance policy . Your best recourse is to work with the repair facility in making you whole again . If you are unable to resolve a dispute with the repair facility you can reach out to the consumer of automotive affairs and file a dispute or the better business bureau . Worst case scenario of your still are unable to resolve your issue you can reach out to an attorney for legal advise .
Great question ! Your personal auto policy would not cover this type of incident . The auto shop should have a business owner 's insurance policies just for these types of situations . You would just need to speak with the shop , and have them file a claim with their insurance company to pay for your repairs . Hope this helps !
That is a great question ! The auto repair shop is liable , providing you can prove that they were responsible for the damage . Hopefully they make it right because they are a reputable business , and value you as a customer , but if there are issues with getting it taken care of , you may have to resort to hiring an attorney or taking the case to small claims court . Let 's hope they realize that their business reputation is worth more than the cost of fixing your car , and spare both of you the misery . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
If your vehicle is damaged as a result of negligence by the body shop -LRB- or authorized dealership -RRB- , your auto insurance policy will not provide reimbursement for any out-of-pocket expenses you incur . Your best option is to work directly with the body shop/dealership that did the repair work an attempt to work out am amicable solution agreeable to both parties . Damage to the engine can be potentially very expensive , and perhaps render your vehicle unfit and unsafe to drive . Hiring an attorney may be your next-best recourse if the offending party is uncooperative . Important Note : This answer was provided by Ed Harris , one of the nation 's premier car insurance brokers . Carinsurancezoom.org is the leading US trusted authority for providing the best car insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Typically , auto insurance policies are designed to cover potential liability , property damage , accidents when your car is damaged and comprehensive claims such as fire , theft , vandalism etc. . . A blown engine is caused by wear and tear -LRB- the vast majority of the time -RRB- and unfortunately would not be covered by a car insurance policy . A `` maintenance '' policy may offer some type of benefits -LRB- subject to conditions and exclusions of the contract -RRB- , but not your personal vehicle policy . Do n't forget to delete your car from your policy is the car can not and will not be driven . It 's possible you may wish to keep the comprehensive coverage in force , depending upon the circumstances .
No , it does not . Auto insurance does not cover maintenance issues . Unless the engine was damaged by a collision , or a tree fell on it and damaged it , or something like that -LRB- something that applies to a claim -RRB- . if there is a situation where a collision cause enough damage for the engine to be replaced , the vehicle will probably be totaled out anyways .
Car insurance is regulated by each state 's insurance commissioner . Therefore each company is going to reflect your driving record and how far you drive to work each day and if you use your car in your business and if you have a car that qualifies for discounts due to small engine or if you have the biggest engine and the loudest mufflers in town . Who provides the cheapest car insurance-you do .
California life insurance quotes can be found online through life insurance websites that have a quote engine that you can use -LRB- most do -RRB- . If you want to compare multiple companies at the same time , I would recommend using the quote engine from a life insurance broker website -LRB- brokers are insurance agents who can quote and sell products from multiple companies -RRB- . The quote engines will typically request a few pieces of data such as your name , date of birth , height/weight profile , any prescriptions you take or medical conditions you 're being treated for , the state you live in , and the amount and length of coverage to quote . Once you hit submit , an instant quote will be generated for you to review and an agent will likely follow-up with you shortly . Please note , an instant quote is , in short , just a rough estimate . The risk classification you qualify for is the MOST important factor in creating a quote because it 's what determines the premiums for the desired coverage -LRB- e.g. being approved for a standard risk class vs. a preferred plus risk class will result in very different numbers -RRB- . If you are being treated for any medical conditions or take a number of prescriptions , you will get a much more accurate response by consulting with an insurance broker.who can shop the case for you . Buying life insurance can be a very strenuous and time consuming task when you try to do it on your own . We do not charge any fees for our services , so you can only help yourself by talking with a broker . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
If the engine damage is a result of a covered peril in the policy , then there would be coverage . In other words , as an example if the damage is caused by a collision , then the engine as well as other parts would be covered under the collision portion of the policy and subject to that deductible .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
There are many different types of life insurance policies , and each life insurance company offers the type of coverage that best fits their goals , operations , finances , and customers . E.g. North American Company for Life and Health offers many competitive annuities and IUL products , whereas Fidelity Life specializes in No Exam policies . Some have a medical staff that makes them more suited for persons with serious health conditions , whereas others reject most health conditions and optimize their coverage for those with preferred health . That is why it is helpful to use an agency where you can shop from many different companies , or better yet , let that agency do it for you . After all the years it has taken me to learn what is best for different situations , I do n't see how anyone can do it on their own . However , websites and online quote engines can give you a start so that you can go into the shopping experience with some ideas of what you might need and want .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
No ! Auto Insurance will protect you from liability if you are involved in an accident . It protects your car from unforeseen hazards . Collision covers your car in the event of an at fault accident , Comprehensive or OTC covers your car from vandalism , animal strikes , tree branches , windshield damage , etc. . Maintenance such as engine or transmission repair , tires , and drive train are not covered under your auto insurance .
It may be considered as a sports -LRB- performance -RRB- car , depending on : 1 . Insurance carrier guidelines 2 . Line of business : personal or commercial ? 3 . Vehicle year make and model . Mustang with a smaller engine may be considered as a sedan and with a larger engine may be considered as a sports car . It does n't cost more to insure Mustang .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
The internet has dramatically changed the way people shop for life insurance , period . Finding quotes online for California or any State are pretty easy . Find a website with a life insurance quote engine and begin your quotes , keep in mind that most quotes online are just estimates you could be better off speaking with a live independent broker . Make sure to speak with a broker because he or she will shop many different companies to get you the best price and policy possible . With some technology to day online you can get quotes and buy a policy within minute 's right from your home or office if you qualify .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
To see what a million dollar life insurance policy would cost for you , go to a website like ours that offers `` instant '' free quotes . There you can put in your gender , date of birth , height , weight , and even some health answers , so that you can see what a million dollars of coverage would cost for you . You will notice that the premium will be much lower if you pick a shorter term . That is because the rate will be locked in for a shorter period of time , and then you will need to get a new policy . To see what your new policy could cost at that age , you can use the same quote engine . But keep in mind that your health may not be as good then as it is now . Please feel free to call to discuss any variables or to see the price for $ 1,000,000 of permanent life insurance . It can be a lot of fun to mess around with quote engines and see what different face amounts may cost for different people .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Purpose Of A Disclosure Statement In Life Insurance Policies ?
Assuming the question is referring to a product disclosure : Most states require a disclosure statement in a life insurance policy as a consumer protection for the insured and the policy owner . The disclosure statement general attempts to clarify the provisions of the policy or product to prevent misinterpretation of the policy .
Ironically , the purpose of a disclosure statement in life insurance policies is , partly , to describe the purpose and importance of the disclosure . The disclosure statement will state what the policy is intended to do , and what the policyholder 's responsibilities are . It will outline the coverage , cost , personal information of the insured , source of the insurance , and certification and maintenance of the policy .
Ironically , the purpose of a disclosure statement in life insurance policies is , partly , to describe the purpose and importance of the disclosure . The disclosure statement will state what the policy is intended to do , and what the policyholder 's responsibilities are . It will outline the coverage , cost , personal information of the insured , source of the insurance , and certification and maintenance of the policy .
Assuming the question is referring to a product disclosure : Most states require a disclosure statement in a life insurance policy as a consumer protection for the insured and the policy owner . The disclosure statement general attempts to clarify the provisions of the policy or product to prevent misinterpretation of the policy .
Most states require that disclosure forms be filled out by the seller , indicating any damage that happened to the property while they owned it . If your state requires such a disclosure , you have legal recourse against the seller for fraudlently filling out the disclosure . If the damage happened in the last year , while the previous owner owned the home , you can probably still have them go back to the insurance they had at the time and file a claim . It 's not unheard of . If it 's been over a year your only recourse would likely be small claims court of a lawsuit . If a realtor helped you buy the home , it might be worth discussing this with them as , if you have a disclosure they can probably help make it clear to the seller that they should not have lied on the disclosure .
I am so glad you asked this question . Life insurance is an underwriting-driven sale . A well-managed underwriting process will yield both good pricing and good service . This is what you need to keep the client satisfied . The underwriter has the final word . At the same time , the client , the broker , the general agent , the case manager and the underwriter all collaborate in making things happen . In addition , third-parties such as physicians offices , and advisers such as accountants and attorneys and bankers , all have a role to play . Let me give you some examples of how things could work the right way , and also the wrong way . The right way can get you an approval in a matter of weeks . The wrong way can drag it out to months and months and months . First of all , you as the client must go through full disclosure . Answer every question thoroughly and accurately . Make sure you get prequalified so that any underwriting challenges are addressed before you submit a formal application . You might have to clarify elements of your medical history . You might have to give details on risky activities such as mountain climbing a scuba diving . Amendments to physician records may be needed . If all this information is collected up front , then you can benefit in two ways . First of all you can be confident that you have both competitive and reliable quotes . Your application should be approved at the rate quoted . In addition , the underwriting process should run more smoothly because a number of underwriting requirements have already been obtained . If you dont get prequalified , and underwriting challenges are not addressed before hand , then all the time needed to do so will delay the formal underwriting process . It is also important to get the insurance exam completed quickly . Those lab and test results are essential to evaluating the level of risk you present . It may be that your blood chemistry is off the day you take the exam , and that might raise some questions . You might even have to repeat the exam . Or clarification may be needed from your doctor . Better to take care of these items sooner rather than later . The longer you wait in scheduling that exam , the longer the evaluation will take , and the longer it will take to remedy any emerging issues . Medical records are also a dealmaker or a dealbreaker . They too play a huge role in assessing risk . These days many physician offices are short-staffed and overloaded with bureaucratic insurance company and government requirements . They often contract with services to make copies of records . Their turnover of requests for copies of files is often slow . Bear in mind that they are paid in advance and well paid for this service . You as the patient may have to get involved to stress the importance of a faster turnaround . Many times , statements and documents from professional advisors are needed . In one case I have , I obtained a medical approval of great pricing over six months ago . However , copies of trust and buy sell agreement documents are required to get the final approval , and to issue the policies . The attorneys and accountants still havent delivered . General agents play a key role in delivering customer satisfaction . Brokers typically do not deal directly with underwriters - we deal with general agents who operate at the wholesale level . A general agent who has strong leverage with carriers will be able to deliver underwriting concessions . He or she will also be able to intervene as needed and advocate on behalf of the client and broker if snags pop up during underwriting . Things can happen . Sometimes one underwriter will prequalify a case , and another will formally underwrite it . These two may not agree on what the price should be . The general agent needs to stay on top of this and get the dispute resolved as quickly as possible . Case managers are also key . These are personnel inside general agencies who expedite requirements . If they are really on the ball , then the broker is notified promptly of the need for outstanding records , documents , client information , etc. . If they are slack , then requirements are filled too slowly . I think too many agencies just rely on software to give updates . This technology is useful ; at the same time , managers really do need to stay involved personally with cases and move them along . It takes the personal touch . In essence , with the right team approach and cooperation from all involved , then things can happen relatively quickly . The broker needs to treat underwriting as such and provide proper direction . Without this leadership , there is so much room for error that underwriting can become a nightmare .
New York State has very strict regulations for life insurance agents and companies regarding replacement of a life insurance policy . Commonly referred to as `` Reg . 60 '' due to the section of the life insurance code dealing with replacements , it mandates that agents follow a strict disclosure process anytime they are recommending someone change or replace their existing life insurance policy . The disclosure process is even required if the agent has any reason to believe that the sale may impact an existing policy , even if he is not making that recommendation . While the regulation can be onerous on the agent and the replacing company , it helps to protect the insured . The agent has to provide a side-by-side comparison of the new policy to the the existing policy and disclose all potential disadvantages to replacing the policy .
On September 2 , 1974 the Employee Retirement Income Security Act became law . The law was to establish financial disclosure of fees , standards for fiduciaries and provide guidance for plan participants . Recently 408 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 2 -RRB- was added to shore up the full disclosure of plan costs . Plans developed under ERISA like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s permit tax deductible contributions and tax deferred accumulation with distributions taxable as ordinary income .
If the insured overdosed in the first two years of the contract issue date , it may be investigated as a possible suicide or a non-disclosure issue where drug use was not disclosed . Non-disclosure of a prescription or illegal drug use after the two year contestability may be characterized as a form of fraud , which could place the death claim in jeopardy . If this was accidental drug overdose the odds are high that the issuing carrier would pay the death claim . Consult an attorney for further information on this scenario .
I actually have a sad story to relate on this topic from my client files . Ive had longtime friends as clients . He is an avid hunter . Of course , he keeps all his weapons under strict lock and key . Only his wife had access , besides himself . Unfortunately , she reached a time in life where many things got to her . She suffered in many ways . It was like , all of a sudden everything piled onto her . She became very forlorn , and very desperate . She had no hope . I guess she looked at that gun cabinet as the one source of relief . I helped her surviving husband file the claim for the life insurance benefit . He was so shaken , he couldnt even fill out the form . I did it for him . As you can imagine , this was a hugely emotional time . The claim check was received promptly . There had been full disclosure on the application , so there were no questions about hidden risks . Gun use , and hunting in particular , are interesting from a life insurance underwriting plan of you . I am a strong believer in the right of the citizenry to bear arms . They could be used for self-defense , or they could be used for hunting . Either way , they do represent an element of risk to mortality . This could stem from a hunting accident . Or it could stem from suicide . But as long as you go through full disclosure on your application , and you apply with the right company , your beneficiaries should have no problems getting their money .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Are you kidding me ? You can say that for all individuals from all income levels , with different concerns that a term policy or a spousal trust would always be a better option ? First of all anyone who qualifies any insurance policy structuring by referencing the total population of current and potential policy holders and does not give you a mixed message then they do not fully understand or do not care to fully answer the question as to the benefits or drawbacks of a policy -LRB- assuming that they are not basing their statement in the fact that the policy structuring will be eliminated/or significantly compromised by federal regulations -RRB- . First of all I am including Indexed Universal Life under the whole life product line , some professionals like to clearly separate the different options , which can serve a purpose . However I will assume a limited working knowledge of life insurance structuring regarding the average consumer who would be asking this as the first question that they would like to address once they take a seat in ones office . That being said most people who have not been educated or taught themselves the life insurance market are only familiar with Term and Whole . At very least it is a good place to start as those looking for final expense plans have no interest and are not going to benefit from hearing about all of the whole life policy structurings , and a individual who is trying to figure out how they can reduce estate taxes , avoid taxes for surpassing federal and possible state gifting limits they do n't have any interest in term life and are probably going to be using life insurance along with setting up a or several trusts to help them meet their need . If you already have a standard whole life policy and your goal when purchasing the policy was maximizing distributions to beneficiaries than I would say that the majority of policy holders that fit into that criteria would be best off leveraging the equity in their policy to meet their `` borrowing '' needs . This is also assuming that the policy has been in force long enough to establish a respectable cash value -LRB- depending on the policy , the premiums paid and the interest rates a rough estimate would be 8 years from the policy issue before you would consider borrowing from the policy except for in a emergency -RRB- . Basically the most efficient way to borrow from such a policy would be using the cash value in the policy as collateral -LRB- as you would a car or a house -RRB- on a bank loan . This will give you the most options to shop around for the best interest rates and will simplify the entire process for you . Right now Indexed Universal Life policies are dominating the market . They can be a little more complex and confusing . However they are seeing such widespread growth because of their interest rate structuring , and because they serve as fantastic duel purpose policies . By purchasing a policy with a face amount that is appropriate for your needs but far less then you had initially had in mind the policy will accumulate a significant cash value that can be used as a college fund , a retirement fund , or many other situations . One would generally want to plan on contributing to the policy for a specific amount of time before they will be requiring the distributions . But the amount of time you will want to give the policy to grow the cash value will depend on your needs , if you want to use if to provide a extra $ 40,000 annually to supplement your post retirement stream financial goals for 20 years then it will probably have to grow for about 25 years . If on the other hand you are just looking to find the most beneficial way to structure a college fund that will only be making distributions for 4-6 years then one can achieve this in a far smaller time frame , by the way I personally have funded my daughters higher expense costs from a IUL policy and I think that they are very often the best option , a professional with your best interest motivating their actions will always look into the options run calculations and then present you with your options and empirically show evidence that supports their value statement and product comparison . That 's all I am going to say except if one does not believe in cash value policies then what do they purpose as a better way to maximize transfers of wealth . - Christopher J. Lawrence Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com
Usually Ordinary Life is an antiquated adjective description of participating whole life insurance . Participating whole life insurance does n't not disclosure the moving mortality components of the policy as does universal life insurance . But being said , the life insurance company declares an annual dividend , which by definition is a return of unused premium . The dividend can purchase a variety of policy options and riders like term insurance , paid up insurance , premium payments , limited payments , reduced paid up , etc. .
Yes , life insurance does cover accidental overdose . If the policy was purchased less than two years prior to the overdose , the insurance company will investigate to see if it was truly accidental . And if the overdose was due to items not disclosed on the life insurance application such as illegal drug use , dementia , depression , or medication , the life insurance company may contest the policy . For policies over two years old and policies that offered full disclosure , accidental overdose is a covered event .
That is a great question ! I will start off my answer with the full disclosure that I am not a fan of , nor do I recommend , UL policies . Here 's why : While they do provide an opportunity to earn a substantial death benefit , and offer flexible premiums , those `` advantages '' are often not really advantages . These policies transfer much of the risk from the insurance company to you -LRB- unlike term or whole life policies that have solid guarantees -RRB- , and require that you are aware , and managing the policies performance . These policies are a mix of whole life and term policies , and are typically only guaranteed for a certain number of years -LRB- 20 , usually -RRB- though they can end sooner , or later than that , depending upon the policies investment performance and what you 've paid in premiums . When it comes to protecting my clients ' money and future , I prefer to suggest policies that are guaranteed , and therefore safer . A UL policy may be right for you , or it may be a bit riskier than you would prefer . There are many policies out there , and some have started offering limited guarantees , so please talk with your agent about whatever concerns you may have . And a last bit of advice ? Ask them to show you real numbers on the policies returns , and not the projected estimates in the illustration . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
It is common practice for it companies to use 3rd parties services in day to day operations , including 3rd party hosting . Your professional liability insurance may be covering your liability arising out of use of 3rd party hosting as long as there is always a written contract between you and your clients , with insurance stipulations , disclosures of your responsibility for use of 3rd party products and services , warranties and hold harmless agreements . The best way to find out is to call your insurance carrier claims department and ask them a `` what if '' question . For example , what if a 3rd party hosting vendor fails and this results in financial loss for me and my client . Am I covered ?
Life insurance does n't necessarily test urine for Xanax or other anxiety or depression drugs per say . However , life insurance requires the full disclosure of all prescriptions . If anxiety or depression was caused by life events -LRB- like divorce or a death -RRB- , i.e. a major life set back thats one thing , even a managed mild case of depressionshould n'tbe an obstacle to securing life insurance . Companies are looking for established long term use of psyche drugs and manic episodes for a declination .
If you purchase a life insurance policy on your own -LRB- outside what your employer offers -RRB- , it is always portable . You can move across the country , or to another country , and as long as it was bought with full disclosure , it will pay the death benefit if you pass away .
In Canada , during the first two years if there is a material representation of fact , ie , you lie , then then insurance company can and usually does not pay the claim After two years the company has to prove fraud . A life insurance contract is a contract of utmost good faith and both parties are expected to give full disclosure . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Your best course of action would be to contact an agent directly . Tell them what your looking for . They will ask you questions to narrow down which companies may be the best fit . In this particular case , I would recommend an independent agent so they can compare dozens of companies for you all in one place . Full disclosure is key . You need to be 100 % upfront with your agent when they ask you the medical & lifestyle questions .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Does Health Insurance Cost In New York ?
Health insurance in New York will vary depending on many variables , including how old you are , where you live , the number of members in your family and the coverage you want . BlueCross Blue Shield , Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield , UnitedHealthcare/Oxford and Emblem Health are a few of the major carriers . As an experienced broker , we offer free quotes in minutes -LRB- as do most other brokers -RRB- so that consumers can quickly compare the best plans from top-rated insurers . In 2014 , federal tax subsidies will reduce costs for many Americans . This could impact your premium as well as the benefits of the policy that is purchased .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
Car insurance rates in New York are determined by many variables . Some of the most important factors are your driving record -LRB- including other family members -RRB- , your zip code or county , your age , the type of vehicle you drive , your credit history , how the vehicle is used and the types of coverage you carry . Additionally , the company you are insured with plays a big role in determining the rates . So ... how do you get a free quote for car insurance in New York ? A reputable nationwide -LRB- or New York based -RRB- car insurance website will zoom -LRB- pun intended -RRB- you to your destination . Typically , you can compare the best offers and get expert advice at no cost .
No , Health Insurance DOES NOT cover Long Term Care . Long Term Care needs to be covered through either Long Term Care Insurance , or a Unique Product offered by New York Life called Asset Preserver . New York Life can provide you with Long Term Care Insurance in an extremely large variety of personalized policies , or an Asset Protector which will provide you with Both Life Insurance and Long Term Care in one product . Please call me , Gary Lane , New York Life Agent , for the details that can fit your exact needs .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
To buy life insurance in New York , you can go to a website that offers it , look through your Yellow Pages and call an agency , or ask friends , relatives or co-workers for a referral . When purchasing online , you can use the quote engines and put in New York to see if they offer policies there . New York has its own companies so not every agency does business there .
The simple answer to the question is YES . Depending upon your health , the policy can be issued . New York Life issues Life Insurance to folks up to age 80 . The price will depend entirely upon your health . How often do you see a doctor ? What for ? Do you have regular exams ? Do you take medications ? How many and what for ? I would love to talk with you about your needs . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 .
The AARP branded life insurance is actually New York Life . They just pay for the AARP branding . They go all the way to guaranteed issue so the only three questions on that are going to be 1 . What is your age ? 2 . What is your gender ? 3 . How much coverage do you want ? Anyone considering this policy would be well advised to keep looking . It 's probably the worst deal you can get . Most people can get a much lower premium and first day full coverage rather than accept the terms of a guaranteed issue policy . AARP often tries to sneak into the fine print `` Premiums are not guaranteed . You can not be singled out for a rate increase but we can increase them on all insureds . '' That is completely unacceptable . New York Life is wise to pay AARP to use their name to sell this . No one who reads it would ever accept that deal . But some AARP members trust the brand name so much they do n't read it .
Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is a mutual company based in New York City , New York . They also have regional offices all across the northern states , from Washington to New York . Rated A + + by AM Best , Guardian Life Insurance Company has several subsidiaries , including Berkshire Life Insurance Company of America .
Yes , absolutely you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . Without it you would not be following the regulations set by New York Department of Financial Services - Insurance Industry . Before obtaining a license to sell life insurance you must study , take a practice -LRB- proctored -RRB- exam and pass . Then , you must pass the ` real exam ' in order to get a license to sell life insurance in New York .
I am happy to report that New York Life is America 's oldest and largest Mutual Life Insurance Company in America . Being a Mutual Life Insurer , means there are no stockholders to try to please . The Owners are the Policy Holders . This can mean substantial savings for Policy Holders of a Mutual Life Insurer like New York Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 .
The state of New York is one of the most highly regulated states in the country . Residents of New York general pay more for coverage . It 's critical in securing the best possible price tag by going online to a brokerage firm that has an extension inventory of New York approved careers to secure the best deal .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
New York Life has relationships with a number of other quality insurance companies to offer many products , including disability insurance . Through these arrangements , customers can work with a New York Life agent to obtain a wide variety of products not underwritten by New York Life itself . Disability insurance can provide peace of mind and removes the uncertainty in case of an accident or sickness that makes someone incapable of working . When considering such coverage , one should review both short term and long term options . Business should also consider Disability insurance for key business persons in the business .
Yes . New York Life is a top rated life insurance company . They are a mutual company which means they are owned by their policy owners not Wall Street investors . They are known for their excellent whole-life products . a different division of New York Life sells mail order life insurance which is co-branded by AARP . These are quite different from the New York Life products offered by their agents .
New York Homeowners Insurance cost will depend on what is being insured . Home Insurance covers the replacement cost of the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal liability and medical payments to others . The age , size and construction characteristics of the home will dictate the reconstruction cost which will be used as the Dwelling Coverage Amount . If you are looking for a lower premium than generated , we would recommend selecting a higher deductible option . The deductible does not apply to Liability and Medical Payment claims ; however , it is the amount deducted from a loss payout for physical loss to the dwelling , other structures and/or personal property as covered on the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy New York Home Insurance online ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Matt is correct . New York Life is an independent national insurance company . We are a mutual company , meaning our policy holders own our company , and we are not beholden to Stock Holders , so we can have lower rates and better service . In addition to Term Policies , we offer our flagship Whole Life Policies , along with Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities , Pension Replacements , College Funding , a variety of Retirement Plans . For details , call a New York Life Agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Contest A Life Insurance Beneficiary ?
Traditionally one can not contest the beneficiary of a life insurance contract . The beneficiary designation is chosen by the contract owner and can only be changed by the contract owner . The contract is a private arrangement between the insured and the insurance company and the chosen beneficiary is up to the owner .
Get a lawyer , because odds are you will need a court order to force the change . The job of the life insurance company is to honor the contract with the policy owner . The policy owner has control and so gets to designate the beneficiary . At the time of application , the company makes sure the beneficiary has insurable interest . Is he or she a family member ? Business partner ? Charitable recipient ? People with a financial dependence on the insured qualify as beneficiaries . In addition , the processes of prequalification and underwriting are pretty effective in confirming the insured and policy owners are in the right frame of mind to make major financial decisions . No company wants to enter into a legal agreement with another party who is not competent . So these life insurance contracts could be considered pretty solid . Nonetheless , is it possible that there was some kind of extraneous pressure or personal problem that resulted in a bad decision by the policyholder ? Sure . You would have to prove that . And that , of course , it would take time and money . I think pretty valid challenges could conceivably be made . Divorce , remarriage , adoption . Birth of a child . Death of a spouse . All these events could show that one family member was more dependent on the insured than the other . And entitled to the insurance benefit . Perhaps the policyholder was indeed ill , or under severe life stress . Doctors may have to be called upon . Therapists ? Business associates ? I think you can get an idea of just how much work you would have to put into contesting the beneficiary designation on the policy . Make sure it is worth it .
To contest a life insurance beneficiary , you must hire legal representation and prepare to be in for a long haul . It is unusual that the court will side with the one contesting the beneficiary . However , if you can prove that a major life event occurred and that the policy owner neglected to make the beneficiary change , sometimes the challenge will work . Some are able to use arbitration to settle such disputes . It is easier to contest a beneficiary if the beneficiary has not financial interest with the policy owner .
Anything can be contested . Will the contest be upheld ? it will all depend on the circumstances surrounding the reason for it being contested . This is best answered from a legal professional as the insurance contract is a contract and if it were contested legal counsel may be consulted . Sometimes family members contest a beneficiary when they feel it was an error for that person to be named beneficiary . Overall beneficiaries have not had to deal with their desigantion as beneficiary to an insurance policy being contested .
To contest a life insurance beneficiary , you must hire legal representation and prepare to be in for a long haul . It is unusual that the court will side with the one contesting the beneficiary . However , if you can prove that a major life event occurred and that the policy owner neglected to make the beneficiary change , sometimes the challenge will work . Some are able to use arbitration to settle such disputes . It is easier to contest a beneficiary if the beneficiary has not financial interest with the policy owner .
Okay it is time for lawyer to answer this question , not an insurance agent . With that disclaimer made , in my experience , I have heard of a beneficiary being contested . One of my former clients had gotten a divorce and then remarried , having never informed me as to his change in marital status , no changes were ever made to his life policy . He then suddenly passed away , and his new wife called me to file a claim on his policy . I realized then that she was not a named beneficiary , his ex-wife was . Well , to make matters more interesting his ex-wife called and asked if the policy was still in force . I helped the named beneficiary -LRB- ex-wife -RRB- file a claim for the death benefit . His new wife told me that she was going to contest this in court and had a hired a lawyer . I notified the insurance company as to the problems , and they held off on paying the claim until a resolution was reached . The case never made it to court and the ex-wife split the proceeds equally with the new wife . So does that mean that it can be contested ? At the time I was told by the Insurance company 's attorney , that they could be , but that it was rarely done . He also said that between a will and a beneficiary provision , a will was easier to break than a beneficiary provision on a life policy .
Life insurance has a two year contestable period after which it is extremely difficult for life insurance policies to be contested . Even during the first two years , the insurance company can only deny coverage for material misstatements -LRB- information that was withheld from , or misstated on , the application that is serious enough that it would have caused the policy to be altered or denied -RRB- . Other things that might cause a life insurance policy to be contested are questions as to whether the policy was in force at the time of death , or death as the result of suspicious circumstances -LRB- e.g.suspected suicide in the first two years , or murder of the insured by a beneficiary -RRB- . Most life insurance policies will never be contested because death will occur after the two year period . For those that are contested , very few ever result in the death benefit not being paid .
A carrier can contest a death claim during the two year contestability period , even beyond that period for fraud . Some beneficiaries have contested the change in beneficiaries , not only by the policy owner , but by those given power of attorney to act on behalf of the policy owner . There have been cases where the policy owners will is in conflict with the stated policy benefices , resulting the parties contesting each others rightful position .
Not very easily . Life insurance beneficiaries are binding , and it normally takes a court action to undo the designated beneficiary . In fact , it is harder to contest the beneficiary of a life insurance policy than it is to contest a will . If you are in that situation , get a good attorney , gather all your facts and supporting data , and be prepared to put some money and effort into the challenge .
After the contestability clause in the policy ends the answer is `` yes '' an insurance company will pay a claim even if suicide was involved . Some states reduce the contestability period down from two years to one . The contestability clause or contestability period is the period of time an insurance carrier can call into question any answer provided in an application by the insured , The insurance carrier can also create temporary exclusions to be in effect during that period of time . If false information is found during this period , a policy can be resended , premiums returned , claim or not . Same for an stated act declared in the policy . Always a good idea to review exclusions page of any insurance policy . After that period has ended , the insurance company can not contest something like a suicide .
The claims paying ability of a life insurance company is assumed by those who purchase life insurance policies . And even if the historical record is untarnished in this regard , it cant be cited by a licensed agent , nor can the guaranteed state fund be used in a sales presentation to manipulate the prospect . It is possible that a life insurance company could fall into receivership and the claims exceed the guaranteed fund and in such a case the life insurance may not pay the beneficiaries . Including in this answer is the two year life insurance company contestability period covering suicide and fraud . And some cases of fraud may extend past the two year contestability . The investigation of a homicide could reveal criminal intent by the beneficiaries , thus denying the claim .
This is a really odd question . I am not sure anyone third party tracks these statistics that I have ever found . Life insurance companies are not in the business of denying legitimate claims per se . All life insurance policies have a contestability clause which is usually two years to protect themselves from fraud or suicide . After the contestability phase , it would be hard pressed to deny a life claim . The only scenario that comes to mind is a beneficiary murdering an insured . For an example , a husband killing his wife for the life insurance money . You would be hard pressed to receive benefits , but if the children were contingent beneficiaries , in most cases , they would receive the death proceeds .
The answer will vary depending on the reason for the contest . Typically a policy is contested if the Insurer believes that what they originally approved -LRB- the insured current condition at time of policy issue -RRB- and what actually is does not match . Lets say an applicant dies from a form of cancer and it was determined that they had this condition for years and knew about it . If it was disclosed prior to policy issuance and the policy was issued anyway , there would be no reason to contest . But if it was not disclosed and the Insurance company would have denied issuing the policy had they known it will be contested . One of the best way to ensure this does not happen is to be honest when applying . Insurance companies have to evaluate risk before issuing a policy . If they feel it is an acceptable risk they will issue a policy . If not it will be denied . I hope this answers your question .
Life insurance covers the life of the insured . There are a few exclusions within the first two years . These two years are known as the contestability period . This time period gives the life insurance carrier time to investigate as cause of death to see if an illness was missed during the underwriting period . Another common cause of death to be excluded under the contestability period is a suicide . After the two year contestability period most companies will pay the death benefit regardless of the cause of death unless fraud can be explicitly proven or an activity such as racing , skydiving , rock climbing , etc. is excluded upon issue of the coverage .
Life insurance typically will not pay a death claim if the cause of death is suicide within 2 years upon issue of the policy . After the 2 year contestability clause has passed , life insurance companies will pay the death benefit . If suicide occurred within the contestability clause , the beneficiary should receive back the premiums that were already paid -LRB- not the death benefit -RRB- .
what will void a life insurance policy ? Basically any deciet given during the application process will void a policy if found out within the first two policy years . After that , in most cases contestability by an insurance carrier has ended . Except some states have modified contestibility laws sometimes in the insurance company 's favor . In my state , concerning lying about smoking on the application , there is no limit for an insurance company to contest . The state considers the policy null and void . Other states may have something similar .
Yes , there is a two year contestable period on life insurance policies . If death occurs during this time , the insurance company will review medical records closely before paying the claim . Some simplified issue companies have a history of not paying claims on a high percent of contestable claims . A small number of companies actually release to the public the percent of contestable claims that they paid last year . As you would expect , those companies pay the highest % of them .
Depending on the state you live in the contestability portion of a life policy may be one to two years . After this period of time , unless otherwise stated within the policy exceptions , a policy will pay the benefit to the persons named as beneficiaires within the policy . Prior to the stated contestability period end , an overdose would be investigated for intentional or accidental . If found to be intentional within that contestability period , premiums paid would usually be refunded , but no claim paid .
Life insurance policies in most states with a few exceptions have a contestability clause on suicide . The method of suicide is irrelevant . Most contestability clauses are two years from the effective date . Yes , if the cause of death were to be ruled a suicide and the coverage has been in force of two years the death benefit most likely would be paid . If the gunshot wound were ruled by a coroner as accidental or homicide the contestability clause would not be effected and benefits would be paid in almost all cases .
All life insurance policies have a two year contestable period . It is the first two years after the policy goes into effect . During the two year contestable period , if death would occur , the insurance company will review the claim to make sure that the health and personal information on the application was correct . If there was a misrepresentation on the application that would have caused the price to be changed or policy to be declined , the policy may not pay the death benefit . During the contestable period , the policy will also not pay for death by suicide .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Taxed In Indiana ?
Life insurance is not charged income tax in Indiana or any other state , as long as the beneficiary is a person . If the beneficiary is the estate , the proceeds will be subject to income tax . Also , interest paid on the face amount for cash value policies can be taxed . Federal and state estate taxes also are charged on the excess over the exempt amount .
Yes possibly . Indiana has an inheritance tax that life insurance can be included in . Spouses are exempt , but most other kin and non-related persons to the insured could incur the inheritance tax . In Indiana the tax ranges from 1 to 20 % and is due 9 months after death .
Yes possibly . Indiana has an inheritance tax that life insurance can be included in . Spouses are exempt , but most other kin and non-related persons to the insured could incur the inheritance tax . In Indiana the tax ranges from 1 to 20 % and is due 9 months after death .
When a beneficiary in Indiana collects the death benefit from a life insurance policy upon the death of the insured person , the life insurance proceeds are protected from creditors in Indiana . Creditors could go after the life insurance proceeds if the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debts of the Insured . They could also collect on the life insurance money if the beneficiary was left to the estate .
Comparing health insurance quotes in Indiana is very simple and you 'll be able to view the best prices from the top-rated companies . Typically , utilizing an experienced broker 's website will yield you the best rates . As an experienced broker myself , with a premier trusted website , we utilize modern software and are able to research and find the best offers . The Indiana Health Insurance Exchange allows you to apply for many affordable plans through Anthem and a few other carriers . No medical questions need to be answered and during Open Enrollment , your acceptance is virtually guaranteed . The new Marketplace will also provide a federal tax subsidy of your income is under 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level .
Brandon is right . That is way too broad of a question to answer specifically . But there are studies that are done every year comparing auto insurance premiums from state to state . In the 2014 study , Indiana ranked # 12 in the country for having the lowest auto insurance premium . Compared to most states , Indiana does n't have that many coverage requirements as other states do .
With more than 33 years of experience as a broker -LRB- and fully licensed in Indiana -RRB- , I 'll answer your question . That depends . I know ... That 's not a specific answer . But there are many variables that impact the rate ... such as your age , where in Indiana you live , the type of coverage etc. . . A federal subsidy may also drastically reduce your rate . Many of my Hoosier clients are quite surprised when notified of the magnitude of the discount .
Low cost health insurance in Indiana is available and can be purchased from an experienced broker -LRB- with the help of their website -RRB- . Anthem and UnitedHealthcare are two of the biggest carriers in the state . They offer a wide variety of single , family and business healthcare plans . As a broker for more than 32 years , our job is to determine which plan best matches the needs you have and the budget you have to work with . The Indian Health Insurance Exchange has an Open Enrollment that offers four types of plans with financial subsidies . Do you qualify for subsidies ? Which plan is the most economical ? Will your pre-existing conditions be covered ? These are some of the topics that our websites offer along with free online quoting and comparison of plans . Indiana has many affordable options .
Life insurance is not charged income tax in Indiana or any other state , as long as the beneficiary is a person . If the beneficiary is the estate , the proceeds will be subject to income tax . Also , interest paid on the face amount for cash value policies can be taxed . Federal and state estate taxes also are charged on the excess over the exempt amount .
There are many affordable health insurance plans in Indiana , thanks to the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare . What reduces rates -LRB- often dramatically -RRB- , is the federal subsidy that is based on your household income . Often , this can generate financial help of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 per year . And this money is automatically deducted from the premium . Anthem typically offers the the lowest rates , although Humana is competitive in many areas . Both individual and family plans are available along with coverage for small businesses . If household income is too high to qualify for a subsidy , off-Exchange plans can be purchased from the participating major carriers . Where do you get the best rates ? Typically , an experienced broker website will offer the lowest prices along with expert advice . There are never fees or charges for utilizing this type of assistance . I should know since I 'm an Indiana health insurance broker and have been in the business for 33 years . But it does n't seem that long !
Yes , the Farm Bureau does offer life insurance . You can contact your state Farm Bureau to find an agent . Or you can get a quote via the internet from United Home Life , of whom the parent company is United Farm Family Life Insurance Co , which operates as a subsidiary of the Indiana Farm Bureau . UHL provides life insurance in most states .
The most popular plan offered by the Colonial Penn Life Insurance Company is their guaranteed acceptance life insurance . The maximum face amount offered for that product is $ 8,000 . They do offer a few other products as well , with the maximum face amount of $ 50,000 for one and $ 25,000 for the rest . As far as I know , their life insurance is fine . Since it does not require an exam , you may be able to find lower prices elsewhere for those aimed to persons with good health . Their parent company , CNO Financial Group , is based in Indiana . Colonial Penn Life Insurance Company is rated B + + by AM Best .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
Car insurance is priced based on risk of a specific situation , so there is a lot of variation in price from person to person depending on his or her risk profile . With this understanding , according to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners , the average cost of auto insurance in the state of Indiana is about $ 625 per year .
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
Effective 1/1/2014 nobody can be denied health insurance in Indiana or any other state in the country . However , you will need to enroll in a policy during the enrollment period or else you 'll be unable to get insurance unless you fall under a special enrollment circumstance . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run your own personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
During Open Enrollment , you can not be denied health insurance in Indiana -LRB- assuming you meet eligibility guidelines -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- also provides a federal subsidy that can potentially reduce your premium . The amount is based on household income . When Open Enrollment ends , assuming you do not have a qualifying event , a short-term policy -LRB- which is not ACA-compliant -RRB- can be applied for . But you CAN be denied for this type of coverage .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
It is really impossible to say any one company is `` best '' for all situations . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents all the major companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . If you are eligible for financial assistance from the Affordable Care act , you should also make sure the agent you speak to is certified to sell on the exchange . There are only a small number of companies offering `` Omabacare '' plans in Indiana at this time . In some counties , Anthem Blue Cross is the only company available on the exchange at all . They do offer several different plans , with varying costs and coverage .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance If I 'm Unemployed ?
Yes . Health insurance today is , in short , guaranteed issue - you can not be denied health insurance for any pre-existing condition or other health-related reason . Depending on your income , you may be able to qualify for a subsidy to reduce the cost of your health insurance premium . If you are below the minimum requirements to qualify for a subsidy , you may be able to qualify for Medicaid . Under the Affordable Care Act , if you do not want to buy a health plan , you can be subject to pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . Many individuals have options for group insurance through their employer or they are on Medicare or Medicaid . If you decide to buy a health insurance plan , then you would either need to buy it on or off the health insurance exchanges . Buying on the exchanges is beneficial if you qualify for a subsidy . Subsidies can only be used for on-exchange plans - they can not be used towards plans sold off the health exchanges . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Great question ! All insurances work off of assumed risk . The higher the risk , the more expensive the rates . The insurance companies use a variety of statistical information to determine the levels of risk . They also make some assumptions that may or may not be true to you personally , but tend to hold true over the general population of the group . For example , the assumption is that if you smoke , your health risks are higher . The mortality statistics bear that out , as do statistics on cancer , and smoking related diseases . Therefore , life insurance rates are higher for smokers . The risk for someone unemployed is similarly higher than someone with employment . Someone who is unemployed will have a harder time making their premium payment , and the risk for the company to lose money is higher . They are going to try to minimize that risk by charging enough to quickly cover their costs . I hope that answers your question , if you would like to discuss it further , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
There are two reasons why unemployed people may pay more for auto insurance : persistency , and claims . Issuing policies to new customers is costly . Agent commissions are heavily front loaded , and the company has to carry marketing and underwriting costs on new policies . Policies that stay on the books longer are more profitable than those that lapse shortly after being issued . People who are unemployed tend to have shorter persistency rates due to a lack of income . Many people become unemployed through no fault of their own , while others are chronically out of work for a reason . People with mental ilnesses and/or substance abuse problems often have a hard time staying employed . This population is also more likely to be involved in an auto accident . Sometimes those temporarily out of work get lumped into this category .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from InsuranceLibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is term life insurance better than permanent life insurance ? '' Well , did you hear the two words in there ? One is term and one is permanent . When I 'm looking at term insurance , I 'm looking at obligations . I 'm looking at liabilities that I may that are temporal that they are not forever . And so I 'm going to look at term insurance to cover those ideas , those indemnification needs , and if I have permanent needs them I 'm going have to look at different forms of life insurance that are permanent . It could be Par Whole Life . It could Current Assumption UL . It could be Indexed Universal Life . It could be Variable Life , depending upon what my propensity for risks are , but I 'm always looking , is this a temporary expense reimbursement ? Or is this a permanent need that will never go away ? It 's never not is term insurance better or worse than permanent ? It 's the issue of the need . Well , that 's our consumer question for the day . If you have any questions just submit them to www.InsuranceLibrary.com .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Can you get life insurance if unemployed ? Yes , you can purchase life insurance while unemployed . Depending on the face amount requested however , you may have have to show the ability to pay for and the necessity for a higher level of coverage . The lower face amounts would not require as much review .
Yes , you can get a life insurance policy on your brother even if he is unemployed . The question will be who is the owner going to be ? You will have to explain if you are . If your just going to pay the premium , then there should be no real concerns . The amount of life insurance may come into question however . You should be able to get up to $ 250k with minimal issues . Over this you may have to provide an explanation since he is unemployed . Some companies will be more stricke than others so you may want to talk to your agent and see if they can look around for the best strategy moving forward .
I have to be honest with you , I have been serving the insurance needs of the folks of Connecticut since 1985 , and I can not recall every seeing a situation where someone 's car insurance was higher due to their employment status . There are any number of factors that can effect the premium that we pay including driving record , type of vehicle , vehicle usage and where we may live , accident history and credit score to name a few . But I have not seen a situation where someone was paying more because they were unemployed or less because they were working . Frankly , I am not sure how an insurance company could justify that from their statistics .
Under the Affordable Care Act , coverage is available to everyone through various programs including the Health Insurance Marketplace which is a great place to start if you are unemployed whereas coverage is not available to you from an employer . In addition , there are state programs that you may qualify for such as Medicaid . These programs are based on income eligibility , and you can see if you qualify and apply at your local Department of Health and Human Services office . If you are unemployed due to a disability , you may qualify for Medicare , regardless of age , through the Social Security Administration . However , their definition of `` disability '' is much stricter than many other programs . You can apply by phone or in person at any local Social Security Office or online at ssa.gov . Finally , many hospitals offer free or low cost health care based on income eligibility . They often follow a sliding-fee arrangement or offer free clinics for those in financial need . These clinics often provide care from volunteer doctors who are giving back to their community by offering care to those in need at no cost and are a great resource if you are in need of medical attention .
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
PPI covers repayment of loans such as car loans , mortgages , credit and store cards , and personal loans in the event that the borrower becomes unemployed or disabled . It does not pay life insurance premiums if unemployed or disabled . There is a disability rider that can be added onto a life insurance policy to pay the premium in the event of disability .
Your employment status is not a question on an application for homeowners insurance . The company will want to know your occupation but even unemployed is an acceptable occupation . Being unemployed may be a tragedy but it doesnt affect the insurability of the home .
Although unemployment does not technically offer health insurance , there may be other valid options , including : 1 . COBRA continuation of coverage , which the unemployed person recently had on the prior employer 's group plan . 2 . HIPAA portability coverage 3 . Medicaid for those with low income , for which the unemployed person may qualify 4 . A private insurance policy , known as an Individual / Family plan 5 . A private short-term policy to cover the gap between jobs , or the new-hire waiting period imposed by the new job . 6 . A conversion policy , in some circumstances 7 . Options in various states for high risk pools or guarantee-issued coverage . It is important for you to consult with an expert insurance agent/broker in your state , because acceptance of one of these options may disqualify you for another one . It is important to know your rights to coverage , the eligibility rules for that coverage , and the timeframes and deadlines that apply .
Unfortunately , you can not get Disability Insurance if you are unemployed . Disability Insurance uses the income you bring in from your job as the guideline as to how much Disability Insurance you can get . Without an income , there is no lost income to replace , and thus , the inability to get a DI policy .
If you are unemployed you should still be eligible for a small policy , and if you have many assets you could even get a large policy . A stay at home spouse can usually get up to the amount of coverage that his/her spouse has on them . Students who are graduating soon can often get coverage based on their anticipated income .
If you are a student or unemployed for other reasons , you can get a small amount of life insurance without a job . If you are a stay at home mom or dad , you can get the amount of life insurance that your spouse or partner has . Your assets do enter in to the amount of life insurance you qualify for , as well .
Yes and No . If you are under age 65 and have a Health Savings Account that you are funding you can not use funds from your HSA account to pay for the premiums of the high deductible health insurance policy you have paired up with your HSA.The exceptions to this rule are if you become unemployed and need to access the funds to pay for your individual health insurance policy or for COBRA continuation coverage . If you are age 65 + then you are allowed to use funds from your HSA to pay for health insurance such as Medicare supplement policies .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Your employment status does not effect your eligibility for individual health insurance coverage . The important question is how long have you been unemployed ? With the closing of the 2015 open enrollment period on February 15th an individual has to experience a `` change of life status event '' in order to enroll for coverage before next year 's open enrollment period . Loss of group health insurance coverage from a previous job is a change of life status event . You have 60-days after a change of life status event to enroll in individual coverage . You should have the option of enrolling directly with a major medical insurance carrier in your state or through the government health insurance marketplace . It should be noted that if you have recently lost employer based health insurance you should have the ability to continue your coverage through your former employer 's group health plan for some period of time . This will vary depending upon your state of residence and the size of your employer . If you worked for a company with 20 + employees they are subject to the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines and you could continue your coverage through them for up to 18-months as long as you pay the entire monthly premium in a timely manner . You have 63-days after termination of employment to exercise your COBRA continuation privilege . If you worked for a company with less than 20 employees then state continuation rules would apply and these do vary from state to state .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Is It Possible To Get Car Insurance Over The Phone ?
Yes . Some of the agencies out there like Geico , that utilize a direct write system , close the deals over the phone . While you can get an online quote , you have to speak to an underwriter who will run your MVR and adjust the annual premium . With an independent agency , like the one I am with , we can do almost everything over the phone . The only other requirement is a signature on the applications/discounts/waivers . These signatures , however , do not require an actual meeting , it can be done via e-mail or fax . I hope this helps .
Shop , shop around . Shop online and over the phone to get the lowest rates possible . Buying auto insurance online is becoming more popular because of the convenience and flexibility it offers . Also calling auto insurance agencies are a great way as well ; some agents will shop multiple companies over the phone and give you the lowest price and you can purchase right on the spot . There are many service providers available online which makes it easy to get your automobile insured without even moving out of your home . The online agency provides all the relevant information necessary for the process and also provides an instant comparison of insurance rates from various service providers at a glance . You can save time and effort that you would have to otherwise spend on doing the research yourself or going out . Online or over the phone is a great way to save and find the cheapest auto insurance quote .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
I believe there are many companies that underwrite for Progressive . Progressive lists the following companies at WEBSITELINK Homesite Insurance Group Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 866-960-8609 IDS Property Casualty Insurance Company Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-892-0824 Assurant Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 866-208-0978 All Risks , LTD Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 QBE Insurance Corporation Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 American Strategic Insurance Corp Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 Occidental Fire and Casualty Company of North Carolina Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176 First American Property and Casualty Insurance Group Website : WEBSITELINK Phone : 888-309-9176
You can get car insurance over the phone and quickly get coverage . An experienced broker is your best resource that will help you find the best rates and companies that are willing to take information by phone instead of through fax or in-person . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several of the nation 's top-rated auto insurance websites .
Great question ! Your phone should be covered , especially if it was damaged or stolen while in your home . The bigger question is what will they give you for it - if your policy pays `` actual cost '' , you may not get much for the phone , especially if it is an older model phone . If your policy pays `` replacement value '' , they will pay for the cost to replace the phone . The even bigger question ? Does your phone cost more than what your deductible is ? If not , you are better off just buying a new phone , and not filing a claim . If you need help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
You are required to notify your insurance company of a claim in a timely manner . It is a good rule of thumb to pick up the phone sometime the same day of the incident , if possible , and notify your agent . Most companies have a dedicated claims `` hotline '' that you can call . Often it is printed on your insurance ID card which you should have in your glove box in the car . If you have an accident , first be sure to check the condition of everyone in your car as well as the other then contact the police and , if necessary , Emergency Medical Services . If you have a camera or a phone with that capability , photograph the scene . Be sure not to sign any written statements at the accident scene . The investigating police officer will often prepare a preliminary reportand provide you with a copy . The formal report will be available to you and your insurance adjuster usually within a few days . Finally , if your car is going to be towed remember to remove all of your personal belongings .
You can buy Medigap from a carrier , through the Medicare `` hotline '' , from an agent that comes to your home or you can buy from an agent over the phone and internet . If you buy from a carrier or through Medicare you are giving up personal service . Any questions will be handled by whoever answers the phone . If you do n't mind strangers in your home , you can invite one -LRB- or more -RRB- agents to come to your home and pitch you on the various plans . I have conducted business by phone and internet for almost 20 years . Most folks like to shop in the comfort of their home and the ability to make a decision in their own time frame . Over 400 clients ca n't be all wrong .
This isa broad question that I 'm sure will generate many different answers , but here is mine and I hope it helpsanswer your question . As you know , many drivers are distracted by their cell phone . Texting , internet applications , and email -LRB- unfortunately -RRB- arejust a few things that many drivers do while driving . Until we all are driving autonomous vehicles , this will always be an issue of concern . These distracted drivers are the onesyou need to look out for and try tostay as far away as possible . The cell phonedistractions are the causes ofmany collision claims . With regard to `` other than collision '' claims , such as avoiding hail damage etc. , just be aware of the daily weather conditions and the potential for a hail storm in your area . If you can get your vehicle to an underground garage such as a mall parking lot , or back to your home with a garage you will be able to avoid a costly `` other than collision '' claim.There is a company that is selling hail protector car covers that inflate remotely around your car like an airbag . That would be another option if you are unable to leave work or return to your home where you may have shelter for your automobile . I suggest googling `` hail car protector . `` In a nutshell , just be careful and practice defensive driving . Keep your eyes open and constantly scan your surroundings and please do n't use your cell phone while driving . I hope this answered your question and let me know if I can further assit you in your personal insurance needs .
Without knowing more about you , it is impossible to know whether you should get Term Life Insurance . The type of life insurance you should get , or whether you should get life insurance at all , is best determined in a consultation with an experienced agent who can help fit the product to your needs and budget . This can be done in person , over the phone , or even by email . But one size does not necessarily fit all , and talking over your situation with someone who can help you sort through the thousands of products can be extremely helpful . Generally speaking , though , there are two main characteristics of someone who should buy Term Life : they needa lot of coverage for the least possible cost now , and they will not need as much -LRB- or any -RRB- life insurance in the distant future .
You can get life insurance at a life insurance agency in a building , you can call a life insurance agency and ask for an agent to come to your home , or you can get life insurance on the internet . Even if just on the phone , it is to your advantage to purchase a policy after talking to an agent . That way you can go over the health questions to make sure you qualify for the policy you apply for , and will be much more likely to be approved and get your best possible rate . Having a lot of options to choose from is also helpful in getting affordable life insurance .
A cell phone is covered as personal property under a renters policy . If your cell phone is damaged the company will pay the damages -LRB- based either on the age of the phone or the cost of a replacement phone -RRB- to you minus the policy deductible . Whether the company uses the current value of the phone or the replacement value is determined by the policy .
Yes . Some of the agencies out there like Geico , that utilize a direct write system , close the deals over the phone . While you can get an online quote , you have to speak to an underwriter who will run your MVR and adjust the annual premium . With an independent agency , like the one I am with , we can do almost everything over the phone . The only other requirement is a signature on the applications/discounts/waivers . These signatures , however , do not require an actual meeting , it can be done via e-mail or fax . I hope this helps .
With simplified issue life insurance you get your approval right when you do the application with many companies . This is the type of whole-life insurance that many seniors over age 50 purchase on amounts of $ 25,000 or less . The agent that you meet with will do the initial screening and then you call in to the life insurance company for a phone interview . At the end of the phone interview you are approved or declined and if you want to write a check for your first premium , you are covered right then . For life insurance in larger amounts , they will do much more extensive underwriting . Your application will have many more health questions and you will likely have to take a physical exam . The insurance company may order records from your doctor 's office and that can take over a month depending on fast your doctor 's office responds . So one to two months would be average for fully-underwritten life insurance . And for simplified issue it could be right within the meeting with your insurance agent . The more extensive underwriting will usually get you a better rate per thousand if you are healthy and buying more than $ 25,000 of coverage .
Sure , but why would you ? My reason for saying this is two fold . First , in order to have your phone covered under your home insurance you would have to include it under your scheduled property section . This requires that specifically name the phone on your home owners policy . This is a disadvantage because if your phone is damaged through a named peril you have to make a claim against your home owners policy for personal property away from the premise . If you have an aggregate limit for your scheduled property it will eat away at it . Also , it has to be a named peril , it ca n't be a reason like you lost your phone . The moredevastatingpoint is that you will more than likely have to pay your deductible , which for a home is usually $ 1,000 . You can always lower your deductible , but then you will be paying more in premium each year . The second reason is there is cheaper insurance you can purchase for your phone either through your service provider -LRB- i.e. att , sprint , verizon -RRB- or online .
The reason is just liked mentioned above . To see if they will get paid and how responsible are you . I have this questioned asked when someone is looking for full coverage and what surprises is the everyone check your credit . Buying an I phone ? Buying a car ? Leasing a Car ? Renting an Apartment ? Buying a home or condo ? Asking for a Loan ? . So out of everything i just mentioned the only thing that pays out in the event of an occurrence is Insurance . So why would n't they check your credit ? Remember when your asking for a quote online or over the phone and they say `` we have to run a financial responsibility check '' that 's a soft check that the company is doing . Almost every carrier that i represent now and have represented across five states in the past check credit . My suggestion to you is let the agent or company know if that the issue so they can tell you upfront if you qualify or not . Thank you and good luck .
To get life insurance for your parents , start by asking them if it is OK to take out a policy on them , or for you to help them get a policy on themselves . Then gather their information : height , weight , any medications they take , any health problems they have now or in the past . Call a broker who carries Senior Life Insurance and find your best price and type of policy . If for final expense purposes , you will need permanent insurance , or the policy could end before it is needed and then be impossible to get a new one . Your parents will need to sign the application and possibly complete a phone interview . If getting a large policy over $ 50,000 they will probably need to take a free exam done in their home . Once approved , either you or they can pay the premiums . Paying the first premium will put it into effect . And that takes care of it .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
When you go to buy a life insurance policy online , you will run into a number of options . From the most to least automated , here are some of them . 1 -RRB- You put your information into an online application and your policy is issued within minutes . I have seen these websites come and go and am not sure how many exist online at this time . Premiums are comparatively high because they do little to no medical underwriting , and everyone may be lumped together at the same price . It puts a lot of responsibility on the individual to read the fine print . 2 -RRB- You enter your information online and get a quote . At this time , you fill out an application with an agent over the phone , or fill out the app online and then do a phone interview with the life insurance company . Because this type of policy digs a little deeper , premiums are more competitive . I like this option for people who are in a hurry or who hate to fill out paperwork . I do recommend at least talking to an agent before filling out the application with the company , as an agent can steer you in another direction if there is something in your profile that would cause you to be declined or rated up . 3 -RRB- You get a quote online , then email or talk to an agent to determine whether that is your best rate . Then you are mailed or emailed an application that you can complete and fax , mail or email back . There may or may not be an exam involved . At the end , you have a policy just like you would have had if you had gone to a local insurance office . This is a good choice for large face amounts and for people with health conditions . It allows us agents to be involved from the get go so that we can prevent problems and make sure the policy is issued at your best possible rate . The best part about buying life insurance online is being able to do it all from the comfort and convenience of your home . You can make it as automated or personal as you like . I hope the above helps you determine what option is best for you .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can Car Insurance Deny Coverage ?
You can be denied if you apply for car insurance coverage . For example , if you did not have a valid drover 's license or were not a US citizen , you would likely be denied . If your driving record could not be verified , it is possible you would not be offered coverage . Of course , too many tickets , accidents or claims may cause a denial when you apply . Utilize a broker who represents multiple carriers to help you fund the company that offers the lowest rates . A reputable website is also a great resource .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
It really depends on the State you are in . In California if someone loaned their car to a friend and the friend caused the accident the insurance policy covering the car that did the damage is responsible to pay the claim if they were at fault . However there may be exclusions on the policy that could deny coverage . Without really knowing more it 's difficult to say in your situation . If a claim is being denied I would ask specifically as to why it is being denied . You can fall back on your own insurance to cover the loss to your vehicle providing you have collision coverage .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
I assume you mean `` can a life insurance company deny coverage '' and the answer is yes . A life insurance carrier can deny coverage for many reasons including health , lifestyle and financial considerations . The only type of coverage which can not deny a policy is called `` guaranteed issue '' and those policies have a 2 year waiting period before coverage begins , except for accidental death .
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
People should not apply for life insurance policies for which they know they will be denied . You can know ahead with some policies because they have criteria that you must meet . E.g. . They may not approve if you use oxygen , or if you weigh over a certain amount . Sometimes , the only way you can know if you will be denied is by asking an agent who is familiar with that company 's underwriting guidelines . Sometimes , people apply for policies where they are not sure if they will be denied or not . I.e. . They have risk factors , but appear to meet the underwriting guidelines . It is not always possible to be able to tell ahead of time whether you will be declined or not . The final word will come from the underwriter after the underwriter reviews your medical records . One thing is certain : you can decrease your chance of being declined by using an agent who understands your health and risk factors , and who can match you up to the policy that best meets your needs . Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have a risk that might cause your life insurance to be denied . I can help you avoid an unnecessary decline and help you find an affordable policy .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
If you were denied , health insurance the question we must ask is why were you denied coverage ? Depending on the reason and/or reasons why you were denied coverage , the next steps that you would take would be to look to obtain coverage through a different carrier or seek out a guaranteed issuance plan .
Assuming that all the cards are on the table and the agent really knows what they are doing , declines should not happen too often . But even in that case , here are some reasons people can be denied life insurance . 1 -RRB- Medical reasons that even they may not realize or think about when they talk to their agent . E.g. . The applicant takes two medications for depression , which is insurable . But when the underwriter looks at the medical records , they find that the patient has recently expressed suicidal thoughts to their psychiatrist , and the policy is denied . 2 -RRB- Insufficient medical information . E.g. . The underwriter wants to see the results of an MRI and no one can find it . 3 -RRB- Tobacco with a serious health condition that is impacted by smoking . E.g. Someone says they quit smoking when they had a heart attack a year ago , but then tobacco is found in lab results . 4 -RRB- Financial reasons . E.g. . The applicant is in the middle of bankruptcy proceedings , has a very poor credit rating , and owes back taxes . Rather than calling this a decline , it is often called a postponement . 5 -RRB- Wrong product . This is the most common reason for decline I hear about when people come to us after being declined elsewhere . They were just told to apply with a product that clearly does not work with their health and personal details . That is a completely avoidable reason for being denied . As you can see by the examples above , some people would be better off going with a No Exam policy to lessen their chances of being denied . Others are better off using medically underwritten coverage . Using an agency that specializes in taking cases declined by others can help you get an approval the first time .
Currently in most states you can be denied individual health insurance if your pre-existing conditions are severe or costly . As a result of Obamacare , most states do not have child only health insurance plans . In most cases you can not be denied employer group health insurance plan coverage . All this will change in 2014 when carriers can not deny you but expect premiums to be 2x current levels .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
The car must be roadworthy to be registered . When an insurance company declares that a car is a total loss , its registration turns to Cat C . It means that the cost of repairs exceeds the value of the car . Cat C registration does not make the car uninsurable . In California an insurer may not deny coverage based upon the vehicles category . However , some companies will not provide physical damage coverage for a Cat C vehicle .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
Life insurance companies issue contracts . There are requirements for the company and there are requirements for the customer . If the customer commits suicide in the first couple of years most companies can , by contract , deny the death benefit . If there has been an attempt to defraud the company the claim can be denied . Very few claims are denied . Law suits often accompany a denial .
If you are speaking of applying for life insurance , yes , life insurance can be denied for poor health or other risk factors . Each policy has it 's own criteria , including ages and states for which that product is offered . It is important to cover all the questions on the application with your agent , or have them reviewed by your agent , to be sure that you are applying for a policy for which you qualify . Many denied or declined policies are unnecessary if the proper steps had been taken beforehand . If you are asking whether a life insurance benefit can be denied , see Jerry 's answer .
In addition to the excellent explanations offered by the other agents on this page , life insurance claims are sometimes denied due to the nature of the policy . If you purchase a graded policy , it will pay a reduced benefit for death due to natural causes during the first 1-4 years . With that type of policy , death due to accident will usually pay 100 % from day one . Sometimes accidental death is actually caused by a health condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack while driving a car -RRB- . When the claim is denied , it can come as a surprise because survivors were not aware that the policy was a graded during the first two years , and/or that the root cause of death was determined to be natural vs accidental . The same is true for people who think they are buying life insurance , when they are actually buying accidental death insurance . You need to be very careful about what type of policy you are getting so that your claim is not denied simply because you purchased the wrong type of policy . A final , common reason for denial of claims is late premium payments . In our office , we spend a lot of time each week reminding people whose policies have entered the grace period , that they need to pay their premium or lose their coverage . But many agencies due not send reminders , and it is easy to lose track of addresses , phone numbers , and email address of clients because people change those frequently in today 's society . At the very least , keep your address up to date with the insurance company so that you will receive any late notices and keep your policy in force for the time of need .
Life insurance is denied when the applicant does not qualify for the policy they applied for . This is also called a decline . Using an experienced agent can greatly reduce your chance of being denied , especially when you have a health condition or other risk factors . Far too many declines happen simply because the applicant was misled or did not read the fine print . Talking to a trusted agent and being upfront with them is your best defense against being denied for life insurance .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Do Health Insurance Companies Determine Premiums ?
In today ; market , Health Issures have to offer Essential Health Benefics each state may have defferent plans , but they must meet the Qualified Health Benefits for that state . There are five levelsthat the Marketplase has to offer . Every state does not offer all levels , but they must offer at least two . The Affordable Care Act wiil moniter Insurance Issuers to make sure that the Insurance Issues have Essential Health Benefits in place for that State . You may be elligible for tax credits or cost sharing , in some cases you may not have to pay premiuns . It is important to look at all of your option . You can get insurance in the Marketplace or outside of the Marketplace . Remember premiums may be based on what state you reside in . Good luck in your endevor . Remember we all should have coreage availible to us .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
How to determine how much life insurance one needs is an exercise that all conscientious insurance agents go through with every client . It is a dereliction of duty not to do so . Of course once the need is determined it still remains up to the client how much to put in place . In determining the amount of insurance needed , of primary importance is to define what the goals are of the insured . If the main goal for the insurance is to provide for dependents then the requirements for that provision will be the main determining factor for the amount needed . If the main goal for the insurance is to provide additional income in retirement then that requirement will be the determining factor . So to answer your question depends on who the insurance is for . If it is for you , you should talk with an Insurance Adviser .
Life insurance is a pooled risk plan . That means that a large number of people who can not afford the loss of the death of a person contribute to a pool that reimburses when someone in the pool dies . These pools exist in some fraternal policies . These pools become more sophisticated when they become incorporated and become legal reserve life insurance companies . These companies are regulated by the state insurance commissioner in the state where they are domiciled and the state insurance commissioner in the state where they are admitted . The purpose of this regulation is to assure the public that the admitted life insurance companies doing business in your state have adequate reserves to meet all of the promises that they have made . The insurance company looks to actuarial science . Actuaries pour through death records for hundreds of years and millions of lives . The basic result is the Commissioners Standard Ordinary -LRB- CSO -RRB- tables . These take this huge amount of data and determine in a given year the average number of people -LRB- male , female -RRB- who will die in a given year . Insurance companies compare the CSO data with internal data and from that information develop their own probabilities . The actuaries then determine the amount of money that the company must collect in order to pay death claims at a given age for a given sex . This becomes the standard premium for that age -LRB- plus the cost of administration and acquiring the business and reduced by anticipated earnings on the reserves of the company . -RRB- Because companies have access to more precise information they can carve out the differences for those who smoke or use tobacco products . This becomes the first differentiation in life insurance premiums . The companies also have data derived from smaller numbers that indicate the effect of certain diseases , occupations and habits of the population . This information is passed to the underwriters who determine if the proposed insured meets the definition of a standard risk , and if they do not , why not and to what degree do they vary from the standard risk . The underwriter can lower the premium from the standard premium if the individual falls in a narrow band of height and weight . Often to receive this lower premium the underwriters will require blood and urine analysis to determine the overall health of the individual . Others are offered an increased premium if they have a condition that has proven to reduce life expectancy , or engage in an occupation that is considered hazardous . When the underwriter completes underwriting the applicant is offered a policy . Basically it says that the company will provide so much coverage for such a period of time for a certain amount . The applicant becomes a policyholder when he or she makes the initial payment . There are many other issues involved in determining the premium for a policy but the most important is how long the coverage is to last and at what amount of coverage . At that point the issue is largely mathematics and involves the company being able to meet its obligations , its promises .
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
Health Insurance would cost a premium , which is a monthly cost paid by the insured -LSB- person purchasing insurance -RSB- . There are a few factors that are consider when calculating a premium . Typical questions our agency asks are : Is this an individual policy or family ? Who should be covered by the policy and what are the dates of birth for each person you would like to have covered ? What is you home zip code ? Do you want an HMO or PPO ? Now that the Affordable Care Act is available , if you would like to determine if you qualify for premium assistance , we need to know your household size and your household income . There is a grid based on household size and income that determines if you qualify for premium assistance and how much you can get . All of those factors contribute to How much Health Insurance Costs ! Its a custom answer .
Regardless of the brand of insurance you apply for the premium you pay will be determined by several factors . Your age , height-weight , health history , gender , tobacco use , etc. are all things that will affect your premium . How much coverage you want and how long you want to be covered are big factors too . Do you want coverage until the day you die regardless of how long you live ? That would mean you want whole life . Or do you want coverage for only a few years until the kids are raised and your debts are paid off ? That would mean term life insurance and you can buy that much cheaper . If you want the best premium , do n't search for any one brand or company . Compare rates for many companies using a quoter such as WEBSITELINK
You should work with an independent life insurance agent/broker to help you secure a policy . There are many moving parts to life insurance and many companies to compare . We can work with you to determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and how long you should have the premium guarantees for -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- . Identifying which carrier will work best for your program can be a difficult path to navigate . The risk class a carrier assigns to your program is one of the most critical parts of life insurance -LRB- the risk class determines the premiums - the better the risk class , the lower the premiums and vice versa -RRB- . The risk class is determined by your medical history -LRB- and an exam for most programs -RRB- . It 's important to remember that every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines . Therefore , company ABC may offer you preferred plus , while company XYZ may offer you preferred -LRB- requiring higher premiums -RRB- . If you would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button under my profile picture or visit my website , www.TermInsuranceBrokers.com , for information -LRB- you can run instant quotes as well - we 're licensed in many states across the country -RRB- .
You should work with an independent life insurance agent/broker to help you secure a policy . There are many moving parts to life insurance and many companies to compare . We can work with you to determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and how long you should have the premium guarantees for -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- . Identifying which carrier will work best for your program can be a difficult path to navigate . The risk class a carrier assigns to your program is one of the most critical parts of life insurance -LRB- the risk class determines the premiums - the better the risk class , the lower the premiums and vice versa -RRB- . The risk class is determined by your medical history -LRB- and an exam for most programs -RRB- . It 's important to remember that every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines . Therefore , company ABC may offer you preferred plus , while company XYZ may offer you preferred -LRB- requiring higher premiums -RRB- .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
It depends . What is your specific situation - how many vehicles do you have , how many drivers are in your household ? Do any drivers have any tickets or accidents in the last 3 years ? Do you own a home and/or have other assets ? These are just a few of the questions that we 'll look to get answered to help us determine the best path for you.Please understand that there are several great auto insurance companies here in Texas ; every situation is unique and has it 's own factors that will determine how to proceed in securing the best autoinsurance coverage for your unique situation . I guess the best answer is which auto insurance company can best fit and satisfy your current situation and current needs?Give us a call at 469.206.8048 or you can e-mail me at WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your situation to get you the protection you need .
With term insurance , you 're getting a lot of `` bang for your buck '' because you 're only buying the coverage for a limited amount of time . There are hundreds of insurance companies in the market that offer term life insurance . One thing you do NOT want to do is just apply to a bunch of companies at the same time . This can often hurt you in your pursuit of coverage because it can be a `` red flag '' to an insurance company -LRB- so-to-speak -RRB- . A critical factor in determining which carrier 's policy is going to work best for you is the risk class they will offer you -LRB- the risk class determines the premiums for your program -RRB- . Each insurance company has their own set of underwriting guidelines so you may not get the same risk class offer from one company as you would from another . Some companies are conservative in their underwriting -LRB- meaning they have stricter underwriting requirements -RRB- and others can be more aggressive -LRB- meaning they have more lenient underwriting -RRB- . For example , company A may offer a given medical history a preferred risk class while company B could easily offer a standard risk class -LRB- requiring much more in premiums for the same coverage -RRB- . I 'd recommend working with an independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well .
What is the best Whole Life Policy ? While there is no direct answer to this , the best answer is whatever policy will best protect your family . There are different types of whole life policies . The most common is ordinary whole life , also called `` straight Life '' or `` Permanent '' -LRB- cash value -RRB- Insurance . You pay a level premium for the rest of your life , as long as you are making your monthly premiums . The premium never increases and your policy accumulates cash value . How much life insurance -LRB- death benefit -RRB- will you need ? That determines on a number of factors such as : Do you have any children/grandchildren you want to leave money to ? How much of your income does your spouse depend on ? Who depends on you financially ? How much debt do you owe ? Do you want to leave money to your favorite charity ? You want to make sure you buy enough life insurance to cover your financial obligations if an unexpected or untimely death occurs . It is also important your premium fit 's within your budget . Because if you ca n't afford it , it is n't any good for you or your family . An insurance agent is the best person to get with to compare the different types of life insurance and find a policy that best suits your situation . I work with many top insurance carriers with the most competitive rates . I 'll do the shopping for you ! Thank you & Be Well , Mendy Douglas www.iflretirement.com/mendy-douglas/
Pure Term Life insurance has premiums that increase every year as you get older . Most people do n't like a premium that goes up every year so they decide how long they need the insurance and level out the premiums by buying level premium term . When you do this you are paying extra in the earlier years in order to level out the premium in the later years of your level premium period . That is why 1-year term is much cheaper than 20-year term . When you buy term life insurance , you should determine how long you want the premium to be level and buy it for that length . For instance if your mortgage is paid off in 18-more years , you should buy a 20-year level term policy if the mortgage payoff is the reason for the insurance .
Determining the right retirement plan requires a few critical components in your consideration . First , determine your effective tax bracket rate . Second , what your risk tolerance is for market investments . Third , how much will you contribute annually and how years do you expect do you expect to contribute . Lastly , perform a life expectancy test . Collecting this information can assist you in determining whether you should use a qualified or non-qualified plan as well as an individual plan versus an employer sponsored plan . And perhaps the most critical item : the savings or investment products youll use for your retirement plan .
The correct plan for your business is determined by a number of factors . Here are some of them ; How many employees in the business ? How many employees are family ? Is the business profitable and do employees earn a good living ? Do the owners want a maximum contribution plan for themselves . Are there key employees besides the owners ? How old is the ownership and the employee population ? And there are more questions ; How profitable is the company and how long has it been profitable ? And so on . So whether you put in place a 401k , profit sharing plan or defined benefit plan , these questions need to be answered .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How Much Long Term Care Insurance Can I Afford ?
Long term care -LRB- LTC -RRB- insurance is a part of defensive planning for your retirement . Long term care policies price their premiums on the basis of your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . You have three considerations for long term care coverage : a stand alone policy , an annuity or life insurance with an LTC rider .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
The cost of long-term care insurance has gone up dramatically in the last 10 years . To get an affordable policy for the average person today is a real challenge for the agent . The middle class consumer has , essentially , been priced out of the market for policy designs that were frequently used 10 years ago . To get an affordable policy , the agent has to think outside the box , and the middle class consumer has to understand the value of long-term care insurance . 1 . No long-term care policy can promise to pay for all of one 's potential end-of-life health care costs , no matter how muchone pays . 2 . Conventional designs are no longer valid for the vast majority of those that want an affordable LTC insurance policy . 3 . Long-term care insurance , however , is still a very important consideration . For a base policy , figure on it costing between $ 200 - $ 400/month depending on age . 4 . Even if the policyone can afford might only pay for 1/3 to 1/2 ofone 's projected costs , it would be worth it . It 's not just about cost , although that is an important factor . LTC insurance is for the caregiver , not the insured . The entire immediate family - and sometimes the extended family - is affected by an elderly loved one that ca n't take care of routine , daily activities , and needs attention 24/7 . The emotional , psychological , and physical energy expended collectively can be a huge impact to the caregiver -LRB- s -RRB- . Being able to afford even a short break now and then from caregiving can be the difference between the caregiver remaining healthy or getting sick as well . That 's the value of long-term care insurance . Some is better than none .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Often this question is approached by , how much can you afford ? I would like you to think of it as , How much can you afford to lose . I have been driving over 50 years . I have had one minor fender bender 46 years ago . Had I never purchased insurance -LRB- in California I have the option of posting a bond or cash -RRB- I would have saved approximately $ 90,000 . However , a recent accident involving a pedestrian struck in a cross walk resulted in a settlement of over $ 750,000 . I couldnt have afforded the settlement , so I paid the premiums . What can you afford to lose ? Buy the insurance that will protect you from those amounts that you can not afford to lose . If you can qualify for an umbrella consider limits in the $ 1-2 million range . In our lawsuit happy society that is not being overly cautious .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
Long Term Care Insurance is recommended for those having considerable assets . If you needed to go to a nursing home or assisted living facility , or receive home health care to assist you with your activities of daily living -LRB- dressing , eating , bathing , etc -RRB- , those institutions can go after your savings and investments while you are alive -LRB- if your spouse is alive , he/she can keep half -RRB- , and even take the proceeds from your home after you and your spouse die . If you have very little in the way of assets , long term care insurance is an unnecessary expense . But if you have assets you would like to protect , and can afford the premium , having long term care insurance is an excellent tool in planning your future , preserving your peace of mind , and paying the bills if needed . And a word about life insurance policies with living benefits . I am all in favor of them , but you do need to consider how much is `` enough '' when purchasing life insurance that you may want to use if you can no longer care for yourself . Nursing home costs average nearly $ 80,000 per year , nationally , for a semi-private room . Someone wanting to hire a round the clock caregiver in their home can expect to pay over $ 175,000 per year -LRB- $ 20 per hour -RRB- . It can be expensive to buy a permanent life insurance policy with face amounts large enough to cover even a couple years of care . Just be sure you understand how much of the life insurance face amount is available to you , what triggers it takes to get it , and when you can get it . Then compare it to the price of buying long term care insurance providing comparable benefits .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
When Will An Insurance Company Total Your Car ?
An auto insurance carrier will typically consider your vehicle totaled when the cost to repair the vehicle would be greater than the valuation of the vehicle at the time of the accident . Insurance carriers have a standardized table that is typically used to determine the valuation of the vehicle or in some cases you may have the vehicle covered at a stated or agreed value at the inception of the policy .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Many insurance companies will allow you to buy back a vehicle which they have declared to be a total loss . The key is to let the insurance company know immediately that you want to retain the car regardless of their decision on repairs . Once the car has been determined to be totaled it will be sent to a salvage yard and off to auction or dismantle . Once it is in that system it is difficult to retrieve the car , so let the insurance company know immediately that you want to keep the car . The insurance company will then adjust the settlement to include the value of the car in its current condition .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
The amount can vary by car and company , but there is a gneral rule of thumb that is a pretty good guide . Usualy , a car is `` totalled '' when the insurance claims adjuster appraises the damage and compares the cost to repair with the `` book value '' of the car . There are various sources to determine the value of a car including , but not limited to , Kelly Blue Bookor the NADA guide as examples . Generally , if the cost to repair is about 70 % of the car 's value , it is likely that the adjuster will recommend categorizing the car as a total loss and will offer you a settlement sum that is in the neighborhood of the repair cost .
That usually happens when the cost to repair a car is greater than the actual cash value -LRB- ACV -RRB- or `` book value `` of that car . Now , after an accident it may be difficult to determine the final repair total because there is more than likely going to be damage that can only be seen when the car starts getting torn down . As a result , a pretty good rule of thumb is that if the initial repair estimate meets or exceeds 70 % of the value of the car , it is likely that the company will total it at that point .
This can vary of course , but generally speaking , and insurance company will determine a car to be a `` total loss '' if the amount of money needed to repair the damage exceeds the value of the car . A good rule of thumb is that if say the cost to repair your car is in the neighborhood of 70 % of the `` book value '' of that car , it is more likely that the company will total it . This is because in most cases , all of the possible damage can not be identified until the car starts being torn down .
A general guide is when the estimated cost to repair is proportionally greater than the relative value of your car , it is likely that the insurance company will determine the car to be a total loss . Take a look at a valuation source like Kelly Blue Book or NADA for example and determine the value of your car . If the repair cost meets or exceeds 70 % of that figure , as a practical guideline , the car would probably be totalled .
The simple answer is if the amount to repair your vehicle exceeds the market value of the vehicle then the vehicle will be considered a total . For example : If your vehicle has a market value of $ 5,000.00 and the damages are $ 5,500.00 the vehicle will be a total . If the same vehicle suffers damages of $ 4,500.00 the vehicle will be repaired . However if the damages get to close to the value of the vehicle the insurance company may elect to total the vehicle as there may be ongoing issues that can cost the insurance company more money . The insurance company will chose the option that costs the insurance company the least amount of money . Of course safety to the consumer is always an important consideration as well . I have seen vehicles with very low market values become totaled for a minor fender bender and I have seen expensive vehicles suffer major damage and still end up being repaired . If the damages can be fixed properly for a lower cost then totaling the vehicle , then this option is almost always the first option . Insureds will have very little say so in choosing to total their own vehicle as how damages are handled are written in the contract .
That is a great question ! An auto insurance company will generally total your car when the cost of the repairs is near to , or exceeds , the approximate retail -LRB- Sometimes referred to as the `` Blue Book '' -RRB- value of the car . As the retail value is much lower in cars that are several years old , these cars are more likely to be totaled . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
I am not sure exactly what you mean by this question . My thoughts are that you are referring to a policy that will pay the excess amount if your car is totaled and you still owe more than the car is worth . For example , you owe $ 25000 on your car and it is totaled . The insurance company pays the book , which is $ 20,000 . Under some polices you are still on the hook for the balance , even though you no longer have the car . A policy that includes excess would pay off the car completely .
Car insurance is important to have for a number of reasons , the big one being it 's generally required by law ! But if that is n't enough to convince you , here are some other reasons it 's important to have car insurance : 1 -RRB- Car insurance protects YOU . Your bodily injury and property damagelimits determine how much the insurance company will pay if you are sued . So , if you have bodily injury limits of 50/100 , your insurance company will only pay $ 50,000 per person and a total of $ 100,000 per accident . If the amount you are sued for is $ 350,000 , guess who is paying the rest ... 2 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your PASSENGERS . What if you are in an accident , the OTHER driver is at fault , but they do n't have any or enough insurance ? That is when your insurance can help again , IF you have uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage . This coverage is similar to the bodily injury/property damage coverage already discussed , but this coverage is to protect you and your passengers in case you are hit by an uninsured or underinsured motorist . 3 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your CAR -LRB- and your wallet -RRB- . If you have Comprehensive -LRB- or Other than Collision -RRB- and Collision coverage on your car , then your car can be repaired and the repairs will be paid for by the insurance company , minus your deductible . This coverage is generally required ONLY if you have a loan or a lease on the vehicle , but it could be a good idea to sit down with your insurance agent and see if your vehicle should have this coverage .
Gap coverage is an option you can select when buying a new car . It is usually only offered until the vehicle is 1-2 years old with most companies . It 's helps protect you from depreciation -LRB- being upside down on a car loan -RRB- if there is a total loss to the vehicle while it is still fairly new . You need to look closely at the terms of gap coverage , as they vary from one company to the next . some companies will flat out buy you a new car of the same value . others will increase the total loss value of the vehicle -LRB- usually 25 % -RRB- .
If you are in an automobile accident and the cost to repair your vehicle meets or exceeds a certain percentage of the vehicle 's value , your insurance carrier will declare the vehicle a total loss . When an insurance carrier declares a vehicle a total loss , your carrier is supposed to pay the insured what the vehicle was worth at the time of the accident , less any applicable deductibles . An insurance carrier will utilize one or more sources when trying to determine the value of a totaled vehicle . State insurance regulations mandate how an insurance company settles total loss claims .
Great question ! Your insurance company considers your car totaled when the cost of repairing it is close to , or higher than it 's blue book or their estimated value . Once the car is considered totaled , the company will send you a check for the amount specified by your policy , and the adjuster 's estimates . The amount they have determined will be minus the amount of your deductible , and any amount that you may owe them . In most cases , the company will own the rights to the car , and will sell it for salvage , or at auction to mechanics willing to repair the vehicle . I hope that you never have to find out , but if you do , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That can vary but one way to begin to understand the possible settlement is to research your car 's book value through sources like NADA or Kelly Blue Book , both of which have on line sites that are very good and easy to use . Once you have that information , another good rule of thumb to know is that an insurance company will `` total '' a car when the damage cost to repair begins to approach the book value . Usually at about the time the repair cost hits about 70 % of the book value , the likelihood that the adjuster will determine the car to be a total loss becomes very great . In many cases then , as a guideline , figure a settlement offer to be about 70 % of the average book value of your car . This is a guide of course , your claims professional will make the final determination .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
An insurance company will total a car out once the amount of damage reaches a percentage of the vehicle 's market value . Usually this is around 75 % . So for example , if you total a vehicle that is worth $ 8000 , claims adjusters will consider a total when the damage approaches or exceeds $ 6000 .
Usually 70 % is the magic number they use . So if the repairs to your car go over 70 % of it 's current value , then they will total you car and pay you book value . But if you think you can repair it cheaply , you can always buy the car from the insurance company , after they total it .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Geico A Good Home Insurance Company ?
-- > Normal 0 -- > -- > Im not sure I can agree with the statement The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . There are just too many variables for one to draw that conclusion . Homeowners policies are not identical , they consist of 40-50 pages of numbers and words most insurance buyers have little interest in reading , until there is a claim . To determine what many of the words mean , you must refer to court cases and rulings , which are not part of the policy . Buying insurance is easy but buying the proper insurance is a complicated process . Insurance buyers need a competent professional intermediary ; someone with knows the ups , downs , ins and outs of securing and maintaining the proper insurance coverage under the most favorable terms . I have little confidence that intermediary would be someone sitting at a computer terminal in some far off place who knows nothing about me or my community . You may be better off with your local insurance professional .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Geico is a National Automobile Insurance provider ; the insurance company does not underwrite Home Insurance . However , they have a wholly owned subsidiary insurance agency which brokers out home insurance to other insurance companies . Since you will not receive a multi lines policy from an insurance company if your home and auto are not with the same carrier ; you would be better informed if you were to purchase the auto insurance from Geico and purchase the home insurance directly from a discount home insurance company . An online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online has been discovered ; it may be used by Escrow Professionals , Mortgage Professionals and directly by Consumers . This link is an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Geico does write home insurance as a broker but not as an insurer . This means that you can work with a Geico representative to purchase a home policy and they can even service the policy , but that policy is actually written through another carrier . If you have a home policy through Geico you can find out who the insurer by reviewing the policy declarations page .
Geico acts as both an insurance company and an insurance agency for other insurance carriers . Although Geico is known for their Direct Auto Insurance Policies , Geico Home Insurance is offered by Stillwater Insurance Group . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Geico does not actually insure Renters or Homeowners . Geico partners with other insurance companies like Travelers and ASI who provide the insurance . Geico claims to cut out the middle man but that 's simply not true . Geico is an independent agency just like every local agency in your community . Geico just spends a tremendous amount of money to convince the public they are the cheapest and the best . It 's simple not true .
In answer to your question here , unless someone has knowledge to the contrary , Geico backs Geico homeowner policies . Even though Geico is a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway , the Company of which Mr. Warren Buffett is Chairman , the Geico Corporation is licensed to do business in all States and would pay claims under the Geico name .
Geico does not sell life insurance originated within their own company . If you attempt to get a life insurance quote from Geico 's website it will take you to another agency . Geico says on their website that life insurance policies are written through non affiliated companies and secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. .
Geico offers Term Life Insurance through non-affiliated insurance companies . In other words , the life insurance is not underwritten by Geico ; Geico just helps you get it by referring you to a brokerage that carries quotes from multiple life insurance companies . The agency they refer you to is not owned by Geico .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Geico is really two entities . One is the insurance company that provides auto and vehicle coverage . The other is the Geico insurance agency . They are simply like any other independent agency in that they represent other companies through which they place insurance . This is what Geico does with life insurance . If you purchase life insurance with them , it will be placed with a different company . That does n't necessarily make it bad . It 's most likely a company that many independents write through . My advice is to find the right agent . One you can trust to do the best thing for you and your family , not just the cheapest option . Then listen to him/her and take their advice . You 'll come out ahead in the long run .
Geico life insurance is written through non-affiliated life insurance companies and is secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. . Therefore , Geico offers life insurance from a number of different life insurance companies at a variety of prices . You can get free life insurance quotes from any number of websites . By choosing one that gives `` instant '' quotes you will get your rates without having to talk to anyone .
Unfortunately , Geico does not carry Disability Insurance . Geico mainly carries property-casualty insurance , including home , condo , co-op , mobile home , flood , and renter 's insurance ; auto , commercial auto , collector car , motorcycle , ATV , boat , water craft , snowmobile , and umbrella insurance ; overseas and business insurance ; identity theft insurance ; and life insurance from an outside source .
Geico does not write Homeowners insurance . If you have your Auto insurance with Geico , they will typically offer you a Homeowners quote through Geico General Agency and the insurance company they use is Travelers Ins . Co. . They do this so that you can receive a Multi-policy discount . I hope this answered your question .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does Geico have life insurance ? Most of you know that Geico is a property casualty insurance company , and of course they have the gecko as their advertising mascot . They outsource all their life insurance applications off their web to an outside vendor , so they do n't really manufacture term life insurance nor do the manufacture permanent life insurance . So when you 're looking for life insurance and you 're one of their actual policy holders in property casualty , a lot of times you 'll stay within that agency and you 'll go ahead and purchase other insurances like life insurance . If you 're looking for life insurance , you may want to also look online at different brokerage houses to see if their price tags are any better than what Geico is offering .
There is no such thing as best car insurance in any state let alone Massachusetts . You may to need to qualify your meaning of best car insurance . Do mean best in lower rates , good service , best claims service ? There are few really bad insurance companies . The all come under state regulation are required certain level of ethics and behavior . It is true that you may encounter different experience as you engage any insurance company . That encounter may cement your opining about that company . Geico rates are going up because of a dismal first quarter profits . You opinion of Geico may change because they were once cheap and now they are expensive . What do really mean by best insurance company in Mass ?
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Do I Need To Get Renters Insurance ?
That 's a great question ! For a renters insurance policy , you really do n't need much . A good idea of the value of your belongings , so you know how much coverage that you will want to have ; A valid current picture ID , and your first months premium should get you a policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Some of the information that will help you get a proper quote for renters insurance is : the year the premise was built , the number of units in the premise , any security or alarm systems , sprinkler systems , distance to the nearest responding fire department , distance to the nearest fire hydrant , the amount of coverage you are looking for , and more . Contact a local agent to find out more about coverage offered in your area and the costs of that coverage .
As a customer you dont need to provide very much information . Agents have access to much of the underwriting information necessary . The key issue that you need to address is the value of the contents that you want insured . Take pictures of every room in your rental unit . Then list each item that you see along with the cost to replace that item . Add the list up and you will have a good idea of the amount of coverage required .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance is about the same rate with all carriers . The average renters policy in Montana is bout $ 100 a year with $ 30,000 worth of contents and $ 100,000 in Liability limits with $ 5,000 in medical pay and a $ 500.00 deductible . Most carriers are between $ 10 to $ 15 a month . The only advantage in choosing some carriers is that if you already have an auto policy with the same carrier then it can lower your auto insurance . Example I have a client that has a carrier in our agency for her auto but they carrier does n't let agents sell the renters policy you can only get it online . But what she did was get the renters policy online for $ 100 a year but it lowered her car insurance $ 80 every 6 months hence it was almost like getting paid to have the renters insurance . I would talk to your local agent and see if they have any package deals since renters policies are so inexpensive but well worth the investment .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Take Life Insurance Out On Anyone ?
No , you ca n't insurance out on anyone . There has to be an insurable interest and the insured -LRB- person being insured -RRB- must consent , sign the application , and go through the underwriting process . Insurance is often taken out on spouses , parents or business partners as a financial hardship may occur if one of these people passes unexpectedly .
Traditionally , Mr. Abrams answer is correct . Traditional Life Insurance carriers will only issue coverage based on insurable interest guidelines -LRB- these guidelines tend to be a little different based oneach individualcarrier but not dramatically different -RRB- . However , there is at least one specialty carrier who can issue a `` Stranger Owned '' Life Insurance policy -LRB- STOLI -RRB- . Lloyds of London is the carrier that we represent when it comes to this type of need . Please keep in mind that products are State specific and not all products are available in all States . It is also important to note that every situation is different and as such , coverage is considered on an individual basis . I hope this answer helped . Thank you , Don Hansen
You can take out a life insurance plan on anyone with whom you have an insurable interest . This means that the life of that person represents a financial benefit to you , or on the converse , that the death of that person would cause you a financial loss . There is also a degree to which insurable interest is determined by `` a substantial interest engendered by love and affection if closely related by blood or by law . '' This might allow you take out a small life insurance policy on your grandparents , but unless you invest in the care of your grandparents , there would not be insurable interest to take out a large policy on them .
You can take out life insurance on anyone with whom you have an insurable interest . This can be established simply by being a close family member , in the US . However , financial insurable interest must exist even with these types of relationships , with most life insurance companies . E.g. . An adult child can take out a small policy on an aging parent because of the the emotional loss that would occur upon the death of the parent . But in order to take out a large policy there must usually be financial loss . I.e. . The adult child contributes financially to their parent and are using life insurance to offset that , or their parent contributes financially to them and they would suffer financial loss upon the death of that parent .
No , you can not take life insurance on just anyone you please . There would be a windfall for murders and hitmen from their victims . Typically you would insure yourself against a loss for your loved ones and special interests.There is a gateway that must be met called insurable interest in order to take out life insurance on someone . Insurable interest states that you , the beneficiary , would suffer a financial loss or set back if said person were to die . Insurable interests can include a spouse , child , loved one dependent upon your income . a financial institution leading you money or a business partner or business interest . You can never take out a life insurance policy without the insured 's knowledge . The insured has to sign and go through the underwriting process , not you .
No , not anyone can take a life insurance policy on you . They must have a financial relationship to you , or be a very close relative . E.g. Someone to whom you owe a large amount of money could take out a life insurance policy on you , so that they would get paid if you passed away . However , you would have to agree to the policy , and sign the application , in order for them to take out the policy .
No , people can not put life insurance on anyone . Life insurance can not be used to profit from another 's death . So there must a financial relationship between the Owner/Beneficiary of the policy and the Insured , in which the death of the Insured would cause financial loss to the Owner/Beneficiary . E.g. . A mother could take out a policy on her wayward adult son who owes her money , but that son coulld not take out a policy on his mother to get even more money out of her .
It is usually plausible to take out a life insurance policy on your spouse . However , you can not take out a life insurance policy on your spouse or anyone else without their knowledge and consent . The policy can be paid for by the beneficiary , but the insured has to sign and go through underwriting . The key to purchasing a life insurance policy has to meet the criteria of an `` insurable interest '' . In other words , a person would suffer financially at this person 's death , certainly a spouse would qualify as an `` insurable interest '' .
Can you take out a life insurance policy on your grandmother ? That question , like most on this website , can not be answered with a straight yes or no . If your grandmother lives with you and you share in her income and expenses , you should be able to take out a policy of at least $ 100,000 on your grandmother . If you are buying a policy so that you can pay for her funeral , you should be able to take out at least $ 15,000 on her . If neither of those are the case , you may not be allowed to take out a policy on your grandmother . It depends on the circumstances , the company , and the type of policy you are buying . Insurance fraud often involves people taking out life insurance on older persons who have a short life expectancy , by younger people who have no financial interest in the lives of the Insured . Life insurance companies each strive to prevent that type of fraud in their own way , and thus you will find different regulations involving whether or not a grandchild can take out a policy on a grandparent . Suffice it to say that if the cause is legitimate , it is usually OK to take a life insurance policy out on a grandmother .
No , you can no longer take out an insurance policy on anyone and without their consent . Insurance companies look for an `` insurable interest '' between insured and the policy owner . An employer ca n't take a policy out on an employee without consent of the employee , even if an insurable interest is present .
Anyone can use an annuity . If you 're asking who is most likely to benefit most from an annuity that answer would be anyone who needs a stable , predictable , and reliable income stream . Another type of person who benefits from owning an annuity is anyone who believes they will live a long time as annuities can provide income that lasts for ones lifetime even if the income stream is more than the initial money in the annuity .
Great question ! You bet ! I think it is great that you would help out your mom this way . The law says that you can take out life insurance on anyone that you would suffer a tangible loss from , should they pass . So while you could insure mom , you could not insure that guy down the block that you see once in a while , or the mailman . You and mom should sit down and decide exactly what plans she has , and then find a coverage and price that will take care of her need . Please contact me if you have any further questions , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
Why should anyone buy life insurance on a newborn baby ? That 's probably the 1st question anyone would ask when the subject is brought up . I can think of a couple good reasons right off the top of my head . 1 -RRB- should the baby die the last thing anyone would want would be to have the costs of a funeral added to the burden of grief ! 2 -RRB- Whole life insurance is a really great way to begin a savings fund for the child that will grow tax-free and at a much faster rate than any savings , CD or money market account . And the money can be available for college funding or a first car when the time comes !
Anyone who has someone relying on them for financial support should have Disability Insurance . Becoming disabled for a period of time is not uncommon , and it can happen at any age . Very few families can get by on one income , and even single persons can lose their life 's savings through an extended disability . Becoming disabled generally does not just take away income for a period of months or years , it comes with medical bills and other extra expenses connected to the cause of disability . That is why anyone who makes and relies on making an income should buy Disability Insurance , in my opinion .
Yes you may take out a policy on your boyfriend as long as it is for financial dependence . Some companies do n't allow this unless there is a financial need generated . He must be aware of the policy and a beneficiary be appointed . If you do take out the policy you will be the policy owner and he the insured . You can also have him be the policy owner and the payor of the policy . Almost the same . Anyone can be the named beneficiary as the insured chooses . There are other ways to do this . Contact me for mors info .
Medical coverage covers anyone getting into your car , getting out of your car or in the car if you are involved in an accident and they are hurt . For example , a person is getting out of your car and falls and breaks an arm ; a person hand is caught in a car door and requires medical treatment . The most common however is when you are involved in an accident . Anyone in your car is covered up to the medical pay limits on your policy .
We have life insurance because we love . If there is anyone that would suffer at your passing , life insurance could ease the pain and assist in the transition . We need life insurance because we borrow money . Lenders often ask customers to assign life insurance benefits to secure a loan . We need life insurance if we want to leave a lasting impression on society . If there is a charity that excites you , a gift at your passing might be a significant boost to their activities . If you dont love anyone , dont owe anything and could care less about society , you are probably not a candidate for life insurance .
You can not take a life insurance policy on anyone , just those with whom you have a financial interest . This means that if they were to pass away , you would suffer a financial loss , or emotional toll to the point that it has a limited financial value -LRB- as would the death of your child -RRB- . The amount of life insurance you can take out on that person is constrained by that financial interest , and they need to sign the application in order for you to purchase the policy on them .
Critical Illness Insurance is great for any consumer , but it 's especially useful for anyone with a hazardous occupation , the self-employed or someone who was declined Disability Insurance . Critical Illness Insurance pays out in a lump sum payment upon a diagnosis of a covered illness , so anyone who would benefit from excess cash immediately -LRB- for any type of bill or payment -RRB- , would benefit from CI .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Who Has The Best Long Term Disability Insurance ?
There are several excellent disability insurance companies , but in the end only ten that are with considering . The cost is a significant item of review , but the languages in the contractual definitions are the real key to disability policies . So its important to do your due care . That being said , Standard of Oregon is a consistent player in this market and a top recommendation .
Different disability insurance companies cater to different types of people and occupations . E.g. . Some companies offer policies that will cover certain health conditions , or allow those health conditions to be excluded so that you can get coverage . Others are better for laborers , or physicians , or other occupations . So there is no one best disability insurance company for everyone . Contact a disability insurance broker to get your best disability insurance quote . I would be happy to help .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Long Term Disability and Long Term Care have similar names , so it is easy to see how they can be confused . Long Term Disability is for those who are employed , and the benefit they receive would replace part of the income lost by suffering a long term disability . Long Term Care is for those who are in need of skilled care , and the benefit received either goes straight to the institution providing the care , or to the person receiving the care , to use as they wish .
The two main types of disability insurance are short term disability , and long term disability insurance . Short term disability insurance pays fairly quickly after a disabling illness or injury occurs , and benefits generally last no longer than two years . Long term disability insurance has a longer waiting period until it pays , usually around 90 days . Then it can last a number of years or all the way to retirement in the event of a disability that continues that long .
Who needs long term disability insurance ? Anyone who has an income that is relied upon for life 's essentials . In my work as impaired risk specialist for insurance products , I hear from many , many persons who have had to go on Social Security Disability due to a chronic illness or injury . What is shocking is the broad range of former occupations they held . Doctors and farm owners end up in the same financial situation as dishwashers and field workers . The chances of becoming disabled are too high and the consequences of becoming disabled are too harsh . For that reason , most people need Long Term Disability Insurance .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No these are two totally separate types of insurance plans used to cover totally different needs . Disability insurance can be either long term or short term . Long term disability is used to replace your income for the rest of your working life . It usually has a bit longer elimination period 90-180-360 days before benefits begin to pay . The benefits can pay as long as age 67 when social security benefits start . A short term disability insurance plan pays benefits sooner within days , but only lasts a few months or up to a couple of years . Both disability insurance plans are insuring most peoples most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . Disability insurance should be purchased when a person starts working for a living . Long term care insurance is meant to cover a person that can no longer care for themselves . The person needs home health care , assisted living or a nursing home . Usually the time to purchase a long term care policy is when a person gets older , typically in their 50s or 60s , but some wait until their 70s . It really depends more upon their health and lifestyle . Just do n't wait until you have been diagnosed with an affliction , then is too late .
Nope . Long-term care insurance provides financial protection against the cost of having assistance with your daily life . For example , someone living in an assisted living facility or a nursing home has long-term care that is needed because without the assistance of others , they would not be able to live comfortably and would face difficulty getting around and taking care of themselves . Long-term care is typically most utilized by elder and retired persons . Long-term disability insurance refers to providing an income to you in the event you develop a disability that inhibits your ability to work in your field -LRB- make sure to check the definition of disability in your policy to see what qualifies as a disability - this can vary by company -RRB- . For example , if you 're a surgeon and develop a condition that affects your ability to perform surgery , that condition would affect your ability to earn an income in your field . To protect against the loss of income , a long-term disability policy would provide an income to you while you recover or transition to another occupation - again , this is where the `` definition of disability '' is critical . If you need assistance with your coverage , please feel free to send me an e-mail via the contact me button or give me a call . I 'm happy to help and there are no fees for my assistance . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Long Term Care Insurance in Massachusetts can come from many different companies , and most of the companies that have survived the recent price adjustments are very good . The one that is best for one person , however , may not be best for another . There are some companies that have better pricing for couples , some that offer certain features at a better price than another , etc. . To find who has the best long term care insurance for you , contact a broker who sells long term care insurance in Massachusetts . That way you can see your top three companies and then choose the one that has your best price , the highest rating , or a blend between the two , if those two factors do not coincide .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Can A Landlord Force You To Buy Renters Insurance ?
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
That is a great question ! You can not be forced to get renters insurance , but the landlord can make it a requirement for you to be able to rent from them . You can always choose to rent somewhere else . But I 'd want you to think about it for a second . Why should you have it ? The landlord has insurance , but it does n't cover any of your belongings . If your apartment caught on fire , His insurance would cover the building repairs , but you and your neighbors ' belongings are another story . And the liability for the fire may leave you open to a lawsuit for the repair bill . Renters insurance is relatively cheap , and can save both you , and your landlord , a ton of grief . That 's why they want you to have it . If you would like some tips on what to look for , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The items covered under a renters policy are not owned by the landlord . In fact , that is the whole point . The landlord doesnt have any responsibility towards the personal property of the renter . The landlord doesnt have an insurable interest and can not buy the insurance . The landlord can require that a tenant have a renters policy as a condition to rent property from him .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
If it is included in your renters contract , renters insurance can be required . This is actually a very smart thing , both for the renter and for the landlord . The renters insurance will protect your property in case of fire or theft , and it helps protect the landlord in case of a liability claim . Also , landlord insurance is generally cheaper if renters insurance is required .
In some States , the Law requires for all Tenant Lease Contracts to include a clause requiring tenants to purchase and provide proof of Renters Insurance to the Landlord . In most States , this is not the case . However , a Landlord has the right to require a tenant to responsibly be insured as part of the agreement ; as long as both the Landlord and Tenant sign the Lease , it is a legal agreement . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and provides a huge protection to both the Landlord and the Tenant in the event of a claim . The minimum amount of Personal Liability is $ 100,000 on most contracts and has no associated deductible ; the minimum amount of Personal Property coverage could be as low as $ 20,000 to which the policy deductible will apply . In order to generate the lowest premium for those uninterested in coverage but required to purchase coverage , one should obtain a quote for the minimum liability limit , the minimum personal property coverage and the maximum deductible . Providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
While I am not sure a landlord can require renters insurance asa condition for a lease , it is in his interests as well as your for such a policy to be in force . There is often a misconception that the Landlord is responsible for the tenants personal property located inside a rental unit . To reduce the confusion the landlord might be asking for you to carry a policy that clearly provides coverage for your personal property while located in his rented premisis .
The Cheapest Stand Alone Renters Insurance is available through Stillwater Insurance Group . In order to obtain the lowest quote for renters insurance , you must select the minimum property coverage required , the minimum liability coverage needed and the maximum available deductible ; this would provide the cheapest quote for Renters Insurance . There is a link available in multiple States in order to obtain a quick quote and purchase your renters insurance online . WEBSITELINK If the insurance has been required by a Landlord , it may be a good idea to find out if the Landlord needs to be listed as an Additional Insured on the policy ; in which case , the Landlord must provide the name , address and applicable account number -LRB- if any -RRB- to be listed by the insurance carrier on the policy .
When renting a home , the home owner needs to have Landlords Insurance to provide coverage for the Dwelling and Premises Liability . The renter needs to buy Renters Insurance to provide coverage for Personal Property & Family Liability . Although both the Landlords policy and the Renters policy are not required by law , it is advisable to be covered in the event of a claim . Many large property management companies and property owners do require tenants to purchase Renters Insurance as a condition to the Rental Agreement ; the reason for this is to avoid lengthy and cumbersome legal issues in the event of a claim attributable to negligence . For a small premium the Renters Insurance provides the tenant with Family Liability coverage which will offer defense and payout damages up to the policy limit . Liability coverage will offer protection for negligence that may lead to a claim -LRB- i.e. accidental fire , smoke , water damage etc. . . -RRB-
Most institutional lenders and referral sources utilize Stillwater Insurance Group to underwrite their Renters Insurance ; in most areas , they seem to have the lowest rates and most comprehensive coverage . In many cases , Landlords require renters insurance in order to be listed as an Additional Insured on the policy to protect their interest . Stillwater Insurance will allow the Landlord to be listed as an Additional Insured on a Renters Policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy Renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . WEBSITELINK
Yes an apartment complex or landlord for that matter can require by contract that all tenants maintain renters insurance . This would be a condition of the rental agreement and is designed to protect from a liability suit against the landlord for a potential claim caused by the tenant . If you do not wish to carry renters insurance you have the option of seeking a different landlord without the requirement . On a personal note , renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers so much . It really makes no sense not to carry renters insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Life Insurance Does A Soldier Have ?
Soldiers are automatically enrolled in the VA 's group life insurance plan -LRB- SGLI -RRB- at a face amount of $ 400,000 . There is a low cost charge to the individual being insured . If the soldier does not want that much , he/she can choose to reduce the face amount . There are also some options to insure his/her family .
Soldiers can get life insurance through SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- . In fact , soldiers are automatically issued the maximum amount of SGLI life insurance coverage of $ 400,000 when they enter the service . There is a small cost to the soldier being insured . If you do not want that much , you can reduce the face amount by increments of $ 50,000 or decide not to purchase it altogether .
Soldiers are automatically enrolled in the VA 's group life insurance plan -LRB- SGLI -RRB- at a face amount of $ 400,000 . There is a low cost charge to the individual being insured . If the soldier does not want that much , he/she can choose to reduce the face amount . There are also some options to insure his/her family .
Soldiers can get Life Insurance . SGLI and through at least one company in the public sector . Here is the deal ... Are they in what is considered a `` hot zone '' . I have been able to get Life Insurance for soldiers who are on active duty serving on what is considered the front line as well but will come down to what their job is . MP 's are pretty easy . Infantry is more difficult but not impossible . You will need to talk to your adviser to determine if coverage will be made available to you and how they will be rated .
Private life insurance is available to service personnel . If a company decides that soldiers make poor risks they will include war exclusion . I am not aware of companies including war exclusion currently . The price though will be the same as anyone in the same age group with the same medical profile . Actually you may find that because of the vigorous lifestyle that a soldier might qualify for preferred rates .
Life Insurance for soldiers -LRB- SGLI -RRB- costs 6.5 cents per month per $ 1,000 of coverage at the current time -LRB- June , 2013 -RRB- . To calculate that , you take the number of thousands of dollars of coverage you are receiving -LRB- soldiers are automatically enrolled for $ 400,000 -RRB- times that factor . 400 times 6.5 cents comes to $ 26/month . With the TSGI protection added for $ 1/month , the total premium comes to $ 27/month . Keep in mind that , under current VA benefits there is no time when you will be able to convert that Term policy to Permanent insurance , or buy a Permanent policy , through the Veterans Administration . So while that is a very reasonable price for $ 400,000 of life insurance , it is a good idea to get a private permanent policy on the side while young and healthy enough to get a good rate .
Medical care has a price . In the open market it is fixed by consumers who want a service and medical personnel who can deliver the service . The problem occurs when someone needs the treatment but can not or will not pay the price for the service . I say , Will not because every decision about spending is discretionary . Should society as a whole bear the responsibility for the medical care for every resident ? Should the nature of that care be regulated ? Should the source of funding be general ? Those are the most pressing questions when considering a universal health care system . Ultimately in a universal health care system there is a specified list of services and a funding mechanism that is not based upon need for medical services . You may need a procedure that isnt covered in the program . At the same time you might consider another procedure immoral or frivolous . Who is going to decide ? The idea of universal health care sounds very good until you understand that some medical services will probably not be covered . In the USSR dental hygiene consisted of inserting a fluorescent tube into the patients mouth and surgery was routinely conducted in a super-cold environment because anesthesia was not readily available . In that case , most Americans would consider the health care to be inadequate . However , it was available to all and at little or no direct cost to the consumer . Under most regimes universal health care becomes rationed health care . The best example is the army under war time conditions . It is called triage but it means that you treat those with the greatest likelihood of recovery before treating soldiers with graver injuries . While it might be the best utilization of manpower , the soldier with his leg blown off , might not like the wait and a narcotic shot is not going to make his family happy . The issue of who is going to pay for the universal health care system is the most sensitive . No one wants to see others in need . By the same token no one wants to pay the high bill for medical treatment . If the universal care is funded by general funds from taxes it will always be a political football . If it is paid by premiums paid by individuals there will always be a need to assist those unable to pay the premium . The problem really boils down to our expectations of treatment level , the availability and cost of that treatment and who is going to pay the price . Yes , it sounds like a great idea but it has many difficulties and when it is expected then the society will start to question the need for universal flat screen TVs , micro-wave ovens and wall-to-wall carpets . There really isnt an end unless you look at the Soviet Union and see how it ended .
Shockingly , a type of annuity was discovered in Egypt in 1700 BC . In 562 BC there is a passage in the Bible referring to a form of annuity . By the second century Roman soldiers were given a life annuity for service to the empire . For the next millennium , churches and monasteries used life annuities . In 1693 , Sir Edmund Halley , created the first mortality tables based on age for life annuities , the basic acturial science we use today . Nothings new under the sun .
The word , annuity probably dates back to Rome . The annua was an annual payment . There were some arrangements where the payment lasted the lifetime of the recipient . Tables for these payments were developed during the Roman Empire and used to compensate soldiers for their service . They received a life time of annual payments .
Some historians believe that the basic concept of annuities were developed by Rome for their soldiers in terms of burial costs and a stipend of systemic payments . But from there developed payment structures that morphed into various income streams based on fixed time periods and now life time income .
Tricare Reserve Select is the optional heath insurance for National Guard Soldiers and their families . This coverage is not free , so you will pay a monthly insurance premium , though it will typically be less expensive than it would be to purchase coverage through another employer or on the individual health market .
Although soldiers who experience loss of life while on active duty or from an act of war would not be covered by life insurance aquired in the public market place ; they would be covered by life insurance if death occurs between tours of duty , before going into or after leaving active duty . The governent and your particular military branch may have some kind of program for those on active duty .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Take Out Life Insurance On A Relative ?
You can take out life insurance on a relative with whom you have an insurable interest in their life . This means that there would be a financial loss to you if this relative passed . E.g. . If you live with one of your adult children and share expenses with them , you would have an insurable interest in your child . The other part to taking out a life insurance policy on a relative or any other person , is that they must sign the application , thus giving you permission to take out life insurance on them . If there is an exam or phone interview required , they must agree to doing those things , as well .
You can take out life insurance on a relative with whom you have an insurable interest in their life . This means that there would be a financial loss to you if this relative passed . E.g. . If you live with one of your adult children and share expenses with them , you would have an insurable interest in your child . The other part to taking out a life insurance policy on a relative or any other person , is that they must sign the application , thus giving you permission to take out life insurance on them . If there is an exam or phone interview required , they must agree to doing those things , as well .
You can usually get life insurance on a relative , but even with relatives , some insurable interest must exist . E.g. Nephew Mark can not take out a policy on Great-Aunt Mary unless Mary has been living with Mark , if Mark has been contributing to her , if Mary loaned Mark some money , or some other reason that monetary award is justified . If a close relative and a smaller amount of coverage , just the family tie can make the life insurance allowable .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 9497972424 .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
You can get life insurance on a non relative if you have an insurable interest in that person . E.g. if you and your boss have been talking about you taking over the business someday , you could take out a life insurance policy on your boss so that you are able to purchase the business in case of his death . Or perhaps you loaned a neighbor money to rebuild his house after a fire . You could take out a life insurance policy on your neighbor of the amount that you loaned him , so you would get repaid if something happened to him .
No , not anyone can take a life insurance policy on you . They must have a financial relationship to you , or be a very close relative . E.g. Someone to whom you owe a large amount of money could take out a life insurance policy on you , so that they would get paid if you passed away . However , you would have to agree to the policy , and sign the application , in order for them to take out the policy .
I feel like the poster child for this question with my father recently passing away at age 84 with 5 small , obscure , life insurance policies for which my mom just got paid . One was taken out when he was 16 years old from a company that we never heard of . I entered the name of the original company in a search engine and quickly found the name of the company now in charge of the policy . Our funeral director tracked it down . If you have the name of the company , you will find the money . If you do not have the policy number or do not know whether the deceased person even had life insurance , you can start by digging in their records and talking to relatives to see if the deceased person mentioned any to them . I have had calls from people who found my email on their relatives ' computers , asking if their loved ones had responded to the quotes I had given them . If all fails , life insurance that goes unclaimed can end up in the files of the state where it was purchased , after a few years . Check out this website for more information : WEBSITELINK
You can put a life insurance policy on someone else if you have an insurable interest in that person . That means that , if they passed away , it would hurt you financially . E.g. you could take out life insurance on someone to whom you loaned a large amount of money , so that you would get your money back if that person died . Life insurance companies look at immediate family relationships as an emotional loss when death occurs , which justifies financial remuneration . However , even taking out a life insurance policy on a relative will have some financial considerations in determining how much you can put on them .
In the context of whole life insurance and in simplest terms , it means no further premiums are due . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' .
If a life insurance policy is `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' .
Claiming against someone 's car insurance is relatively easy speaking from experience . In an accident , you should exchange your insurance information which you can have your insurance company take care of the claim or you can reach out to the company yourself although I would recommend against it . It is in your favor if you have the company insuring you to reach out . If you do not have all the insurance information , you can call the common carries giving them the vehicle and name if you have that information . You definitely will need some identifying information otherwise you are just stuck . I would contact your carrier and ask them specifics or reach out to get a free consultation .
Life insurance is usually purchased for the benefit of someone else . E.g. . So that your spouse and children can lead relatively normal lives without having to move , take second jobs , forego college to work , etc. . In that respect , life insurance gives you the satisfaction of knowing you are caring for those you brought into your life , even after your death . It gives them a feeling of gratitude and respect for you . It allows you to relax a little and not have the worry upon your shoulders about what would happen to them after you die . Some life insurance can also benefit you financially . E.g. . You could purchase cash value life insurance that provides supplemental income during retirement . You could get life insurance on your key employees so that you are not left in a lurch if they should pass . You could take out life insurance on someone who owes you money , or whom you wish to buy out if they should die . There are many types of life insurance and many ways it can benefit you .
You can get life insurance on someone else if you have an insurable interest with them . An example of insurable interest is this : If a non-relative owes you money , you could take out a life insurance policy on them for the amount that they owe you . But they could not take a life insurance policy on you .
The simple answer is : you should pay an amount that you can afford . People who buy life insurance with the last dollar in their monthly budget will end up dropping their policy when emergencies arise . Life insurance that is dropped is of no value at all . Setting aside an affordable amount to pay life insurance premiums will help ensure that your policy is active when needed . Also , many people feel that if they ca n't buy a large amount of life insurance , they will buy none at all . Who among us would not welcome an extra $ 10,000 of cash at the traumatic time of losing a loved one and trying to take time off work , arrange for a funeral , house relatives or travel to the location of the funeral ? It does not take a million dollar policy to show love for those who are left behind . Of course , premiums differ for different types of policies and different types of risk . If you are using your life insurance to provide income during retirement , it will take a much larger portion of your budget than if you are just funding your funeral . Also , life insurance for those who are older or of poorer health will cost more than life insurance for young , healthy persons . But there is also a greater chance of the death benefit being paid out sooner when the insured person is older or suffers from poor health . A licensed agent can help you look at your whole financial picture and pick out a policy that will meet your needs at an affordable cost .
Accidental Life Insurance -LRB- usually called Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance -RRB- is relatively inexpensive because death due to accident is relatively infrequent . If you were on a very tight budget where you had to choose between Life insurance or Accidental Death insurance , I would suggest owning a small Life insurance policy would be worth more than having a large Accidental Death policy , because the chance of passing due to illness is so much greater than the chance of dying accidentally . However , if you are not on a very tight budget , the low price of Accidental Death insurance makes it a somewhat painless addition to one 's Life insurance portfolio .
If a life insurance policy is truly `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due and it is guaranteed to be that way . Some people use the term `` paid up '' incorrectly to describe premium `` offsets '' using dividend values to pay required premiums . Such arrangements are not paid up and not guaranteed . More on this in the last paragraph . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums and are not paid up until age 95 or 100 . A policy can also be `` paid up '' at a lesser value than the death benefit . Whole life policies feature a `` reduced paid up '' non forfeiture provision . In the event the policy owner wishes to stop paying annual required premiums , the policy owner can ask the insurer to reduce the death benefit amount for the policy so that no further premiums would need to be paid . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' . In a low interest environment like we have now , dividends are being reduced from what was illustrated . Many clients who expected to stop paying premiums and instead pay them via the dividend values in their policy can not do so yet since the dividend values are not sufficient to offset premiums .
Can you take out a life insurance policy on your grandmother ? That question , like most on this website , can not be answered with a straight yes or no . If your grandmother lives with you and you share in her income and expenses , you should be able to take out a policy of at least $ 100,000 on your grandmother . If you are buying a policy so that you can pay for her funeral , you should be able to take out at least $ 15,000 on her . If neither of those are the case , you may not be allowed to take out a policy on your grandmother . It depends on the circumstances , the company , and the type of policy you are buying . Insurance fraud often involves people taking out life insurance on older persons who have a short life expectancy , by younger people who have no financial interest in the lives of the Insured . Life insurance companies each strive to prevent that type of fraud in their own way , and thus you will find different regulations involving whether or not a grandchild can take out a policy on a grandparent . Suffice it to say that if the cause is legitimate , it is usually OK to take a life insurance policy out on a grandmother .
Any resident relative with a valid drivers license . Any non relative residing in your residence should have there own auto insurance policy . Anyone that does not own a vehicle must have named non-owner liability policy . Contact a local licensed agent to find out your liability and coverage needs for your specific situation .
-- > Normal 0 Im not sure why you would consider separate coverage if you are living with your parents and covered by their policy unless you are living in separate quarters . Notwithstanding that circumstance , your parents policy should include you as an insured as a relative residing with them . Their coverage may be better than coverage you could purchase separately and no additional premium is incurred . Of course , since you are not a named insured , you would not receive correspondence , be able to make changes or be named on any claim checks . If you purchased your own coverage , its possible you could unknowingly create potential claim problems . You would have your own coverage and you would still be an insured under their policy . If a claim occurred , your insurer would ask you the question , Are you covered under any other insurance policy ? If your answer is no , that may be an incorrect statement , considered a misrepresentation and potentially void your claim . If you said yes , the Other Insurance clauses in each policy would come into play . Thats a mess I suggest be avoided . Im not sure what the issues are here , but from an insurance persons point of view , it would be a situation I might prefer to avoid . There are too many potential problems and for a relatively small premium and commission , I would choose to avoid the potential downsides .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Part A Medicare Free ?
No , Medicare Part A was paid for through your FICA tax when you were employed , so when you retire you have no premium taken out of your Social Security for Part A . If you did not work the required amount of hours then you can buy into the Medicare system by paying a premium .
Most people receive Medicare Part A premium-free because they have been paying Medicare taxes during their working life and met the 40 quarters requirement -LRB- equates to 10 years of working life -RRB- . Anyone who does not meet the qualifications for premium-free Medicare Part A would have to buy the coverage - the premium for Part A is $ 426 per month . The premium-free Part A requirements are : 1 -RRB- You 're 65 or older and you 're receiving social security retirement benefits -LRB- or are eligible for receiving them , but have n't elected to take them yet -RRB- , or you or your spouse had Medicare-covered employment through the government . 2 -RRB- If you 're under 65 and have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 months or have ESRD -LRB- end-stage renal disease -RRB- and meet certain requirements . So if you do not meet these any of those items , you 'll have to pay for the coverage . If you 're subject to paying the Part A premium and are under 65 , you may want to look at an individual health insurance plan on the health insurance exchanges instead . If you 're signed up for Part A , you 're likely signed up for Part B as well -LRB- Part B requires a monthly premium -RRB- . If so , I would suggest adding a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Part A & Part B. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medicare supplement programs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
In short , You can enroll for Medicare Part A and Part B through the social security administration -LRB- most people enroll online at their website , ssa.gov , but you can also enroll at your local ssa office -RRB- . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance and part B is your physician insurance . Part A is premium-free for most people . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 for 2014 - may be higher for persons with higher incomes -RRB- . The deductible for Part A in 2014 is $ 1,216 - Part B 's deductible is $ 147 . You 're also generally responsible for about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
You can apply for Medicare up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . You should apply during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The main way to qualify for Medicare is to be turning 65 year sold . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
You do n't `` need '' Medicare Part C , but you may choose to have it as your Medicare coverage . Medicare Part C is really known as the Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO . Part C combines your Original Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- medical -RRB- , and usually Part D -LRB- drugs -RRB- . It 's important to note that if you have Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- , you do n't need a Medigap Policy and ca n't be sold one to help supplement your health care . You can only purchase a Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , if you are still on Original Medicare Part A and Part B . There are a lot of moving parts to Medicare . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- generally covers approximately 80 % of your health care expenses . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can cover gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- up to or all of the remaining 20 % , depending on the plan -RRB- . This is the optimal structure for many individuals . Plan A and Plan C are usually available Medigap plans for people under 65 on Medicare , but the premiums can be much more expensive than when you 're 65 or older . An alternative option would be a Medicare Advantage plan . I would recommend consulting with an insurance agent/broker to compare Medigap and MA plans that are available -LRB- and see if you have a special enrollment period available for Medicare Advantage plans - if you do n't have a special enrollment period , you would have to wait until the Annual Enrollment Period -LRB- October 15-December 7 of each year -RRB- to enroll in one -RRB- . For individuals on Medicare who are 65 or older , they would likely only have a group plan through an employer -LRB- if they 're still working -RRB- to provide secondary coverage -LRB- although the group plan may pay first and Medicare pay second -RRB- . Under this scenario , you would likely only have secured Part A and not Part B of Medicare as Part B requires monthly premiums - Part A is generally premium-free for most individuals . The premiums for a traditional under 65 health plan for someone 65 or older would be substantially more expensive than setting yourself up under Part A , Part B , and securing a Medigap plan or enrolling in a Medicare Advantage plan .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Does Dave Ramsey Recommend Disability Insurance ?
Yes , Dave Ramsey does recommend Disability Insurance . In fact he considers Long Term Disability Insurance a necessity for most full time workers . He recommends buying it through your work place if that is available . If not offered there , he says to try an association , and then buy privately if unable to get through an association . But buy it .
Here is a commentary by Dave Ramsey about Disability Insurance from his website : WEBSITELINK That was from April of 2011 and I did not find anything newer , so you may need to contact him directly to get a current opinion .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
What does Dave Ramsey think of Annuities ? Not really sure as I do n't follow Dave Ramsey that much . Dave is the current financial `` guru '' gracing the airwaves . There were many before Dave and there will be many after Dave . While Dave 's message about getting out of debt and staying out of debt is a fine one , similar to the one my mom told me many years ago , Dave does n't always understand financial products that well as honest advice on them might conflict with his message .
I love Dave Ramsey . I listen to him and have attended his financial peace university and let me tell you , great advise . I even have his book sitting on my desk as I type this . However I can not speak on behalf Dave Ramsey but if I recall correctly Dave would say do n't spend your money on a fancy car but instead build your wealth first . Dave 's saying is `` Live like no one else so later you can live like non one else '' . Also he would say carry high liability limits to protect your assets and the highest deductibles you can afford unless a higher deductible does not make a significant enough premium difference . I would recommend hisfinancialpeace series and book and then I would go ask Dave what he thinks about auto insurance .
Dave Ramsey recommends having eight to ten times your income in term life insurance . There are a number of life insurance carriers that offer the term life insurance products that Dave Ramsey recommends , and those products can be purchased on many different websites on the internet ... the price is the same for the same product .
Dave Ramsey recommends term insurance . He endorses a specific agency . He emphasizes adequate coverage which I consider essential in any type of financial planning . Not everyone will adapt their finances to Dave Ramseys model . For those who do not it would be wise to consult with a qualified agent and determine the best way to provide the protection that you need . It could be that the answer will be term insurance but for many it is other forms of life insurance . Each of us is unique and one program does not meet the needs of everyone . There is a subculture that lives near my agency that rarely purchases term life insurance .
I have read one of Dave Ramseys books but I am certainly not an expert . I think Dave Ramsey would say to have the amount of life insurance that you need in place when the need arises . A policy that has expired or is inadequate defeats the purpose of life insurance . While I realize that Dave Ramsey advocates term insurance , the key remains the same . Make sure you have enough when the need arises . If you investments reduce your risk and need for life insurance , that is fine but make sure that you have the risk covered . You are valuable and you love people who will be hurt terribly if you dont make it home today .
Dave Ramsey is a big fan of buy term life insurance and invest the rest . He cut his teeth with Priamerica here in Tennessee and the philosophy has stayed with him since he started his Financial Peace University located here in Brentwood , TN . From his radio show he usually recommends a 20 year level term which for most people is a good choice . I recommend using an independent broker to purchase the right coverage at the right price for your unique situation . Peggy is correct most of us do exactly the same as the broker Dave recommends with the same life insurance carriers .
Yes , Dave Ramsey does recommend Disability Insurance . In fact he considers Long Term Disability Insurance a necessity for most full time workers . He recommends buying it through your work place if that is available . If not offered there , he says to try an association , and then buy privately if unable to get through an association . But buy it .
Dave Ramsey does not think you should buy cancer insurance or any type of specific dread disease insurance . He confuses the purpose of it with major medical health insurance . Your major medical pays your doctor bills -LRB- minus your deductibles , co-pays and premiums . -RRB- Your cancer insurance pays a lump sum amount directly to you . You can use this while you are off work with cancer to pay for food , house payment , medical bills or anything else you need . Dave Ramsey is not a good resource for insurance information .
Dave Ramsey generally suggests that someone carry 10 times their current annual income in life insurance . This means if you earn $ 50,000 per year , Dave would recommend that you purchase $ 500,000 in life insurance . Whether or not this is an adequate amount of life insurance depends on a few different factors regarding your financial situation . In actuality you may need more or less .
Dave Ramsey recommends term life insurance . Dave is a buy term and invest the difference proponent . He believes in eliminating all debt and that over the years your investment in the stock marketing will accumulate enough money to fund a retirement account debt free . So , the need for permanent life insurance is unnecessary .
Dave Ramsey recommends a lot of things that many financial experts agree and disagree with . Ramsey believes in term insurance , which is an appropriate choice in many situations . But not all situations . The best resource for determining ho much coverage you need and what carriers are the best choice , is an experienced broker . No fees and no hassle . just the best information .
Dave Ramsey says to only consider variable annuties if you are totally debt free and have used all your tax-deferred options . Make sure you understand the fees , riders , options and surrender period associated with your annuity . Use these four mutual funds : 1 -RRB- growth , 2 -RRB- international , 3 -RRB- growth and income , and 4 -RRB- aggressive growth . Finally , Dave Ramsey says to never use annuities inside retirement options .
As a guest speaker at may Dave Ramsey classes , I 'm quite familiar with Dave 's perspective on term life versus whole life . Simply put , Dave is an advocate for getting the maximum amount of life insurance you can to protect the most valuable asset your family hasyour income . Term Life Insurance delivers the biggest `` bang for your buck '' when it comes to pure death benefit for the dollar you spend . There are many cash value benefits from a whole life policy . However , Dave 's guiding principles are to use the money that would go towards the whole life guarantees and cash value options of a whole life policy in a different form of investment . For many people , term life insurance is an appropriate solution .
Dave Ramsey expressed an opinion about Disability Insurance in April of 2011 that you can read here : WEBSITELINK In a nutshell , he recommends having Long Term Disability Insurance due to the devastation caused by becoming disabled and the chances of it happening .
That is a great question ! Yes , Dave Ramsey does like term insurance . In Dave 's world , people actually save money , and keep enough on hand to be able to cover their burial expenses . They also are able to find tax-advantaged ways to transfer wealth to their loved ones . With 55 % of American Elder Citizens living in poverty , 66 % of our children living in poverty , and the majority of Americans living without any savings at all , I 'm not sure how well his world translates into the real one . Dave has a great program , and some solid financial advice , but if you can not save money , term will be the best choice for you only if you are too poor to afford any real coverage . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
Suze Orman recommends term life insurance over participating whole life insurance , which she has a disdain for . She as well as Dave Ramsey are huge proponents of term life insurance . And for financial liabilities that are time certain events , thats just fine . Generally you can only recommend what you understand . That in and of itself can eliminate your opining on an area you just dont understand .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Company Has The Cheapest Car Insurance In Montana ?
Depending on which part of the state you live in the rates are quite competitive . A good example here in Kalispell the rates are lower then Columbia falls and Missouls but higher then Kila . It is important to compare rates with many carriers , also find an agent that you can trust and feel comfortable with . You can get quotes online but most of them are not as cheap as a local agent . A local agent can compare rates with many carriers and make sure that you are properly protected and also give you all the discounts that are available . doing an online only quote you could be missing out on a huge saving I recommend you call and agent .
When you move to Montana and register your car in the state then you have to switch your insurance to Montana . If your car is still registered in another state then you can keep that insurance providing it has the same limits or higher Montanan liability limits for minimum are 25,000 / 50,000 / 10,000 But If you have moved to Montana then you need to register your car in Montana you have I believe 30 days to register your car in the state once you have moved here .
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
In Montana there are many carriers that offer this and none of them have anything to do with getting your licenses reinstated . On average with state minimum liability limits of 25/50/10 and uninsured and underinsured and med pay at 5,000 on average the rates is from 38 to 50 a month depending on your age and driving history . Each state has different guidelines . Go look at your state insurance commissioners office website and you can learn what the state you live in has to offer . Talk to a local independent they can guide you to what is best . In Montana we use to also have what was called a broadform policy but this option is no longer available . If you have your name on a title you have to insure it even if it is just parked
In Montana if someone has given your permission to drive the car then you are covered unless they have you listed as an excluded driver . Each state has different laws and rules also each carrier has the same guidelines . If you are a regular driver and have access to the car you should be listed as a driver . but if you are just in town and visiting they the persons car that you are borrowing should cover you .
An Auto policy on the st page should have what is called your declarations page . This will have on it Bodily injury liability limits example would $ 25,000 per person / $ 50,000 -LRB- this is medical bills they pay to others -RRB- Then it should have Property damage example $ 10,000 -LRB- this is the coverage to the cars or fence or tree or what ever you cause damage to other then medical bills -RRB- Then there is a section that you should have that is Uninsured and underinsured This should be matching limits to your liability limits listed above . This if for you if you get hit by someone that has no insurance or has insurance but there limits are not high enough to pay all your medical bills that you got from the accident then there is medical pay usually this is 5,000 this is for you also incase you are hurt on near or around your vehicle it also is used for funeral bills incase you die in your car you loved ones can use this to help with the funeral expense then If you have what some call `` Full '' coverage this would be the deductible part . Comprehensive or other then collision coverage less your deductible then there is collision . In Montana we do not have what some state have which is call PIP which is personal injury protection .
Depending on what state you live in Montana there is no rate difference for males or females . Also your driving history and prior insurance plays a role in rates , many cases the average here in Montana drops after the age of 25 no matter what sex you are . If you have had no tickets in 3 years or accidents in 5 years the rate should lower . a Reputable agent will requite your renewal to see if there is another carrier with a better rate available .
f they are in an accident you are liable for the damage if your friend wrecks and hit someone . You need to list them as drivers on your policy along with the car . Depending on how long this `` borrowing '' lasts . Montana is a permissive use policy state so if you borrowed a car to someone then they got into an accident your insurance has to cover it unless you do not have the car on the insurance policy but you also are required to have your cars insured . Now if your friends are only borrowing for a week or two then there is n't a needed to add then to your policy Hope this helps
Depending on your states requirements . In Montana you have to have an insurable interest in the auto . Other cases where you can insure a car that is not in your name is when you have a child living in your home and you have your car and theirs on the policy . There are otherreasons why you would do this example would be your fianc lives with you and you both drive only one car but the car is just your fiancs name the yes you could place this on a policy that you and your fianc are on the policy and even thought you do not own the car you own the policy and they are now the 2nd named insured
Depending on your state and carriers guidelines . There is not an age limit but with most carriers when you sign an application you are stating that you have listed all the drivers who have regular use of the car and live in the household listed on the application . In Montana id you give someone permission to drive your car they are covered on your policy unless you have them excluded then there would be no coverage . There also in a scenario that you would want your child on the policy . example would be Your child purchased a car but needed you as a co signor and the title is in both your names even though your child is not living with you and they are paying for the car but your name is also on the title then you could have the car and your child listed on the policy there are many options out there for your case . I recommend you talk to a local agent and they can tell you what works best for you and follows the carriers and state guidelines . If you are unfamiliar with your coverage then an agent might be a better choice for questions rather then an online carrier only .
The 1st thing you need to think about is what you can afford for the cost of insurance and also what can you afford to loose id you have inadequate coverage . Each state varies for the amount of liability that you are required to have . In Montana the limits are 25K per person -LRB- medical payment to others -RRB- 50K per accident and 10K for property damage which if you think about it that is not much coverage in the event of a major accident . Then you need to take in the factor of uninsured and underinsured both are fairly inexpensive and well worth the few dollars it is a month here in our state 1 in 3 cars has no insurances your odds of an accident and getting hit by someone with no insurance is high . Laws in most states require you to have the state minimum . I recommend the higher limits then what state requirements are however . You also have a budget in mind It does no good to buy a policy with higher limits if you can not afford the monthly payment . So it really depends on what you can afford to loose and what fits your monthly budget.I recommend talking to a local agent and seeing what they have for rates as a independent agent can compare rates with many carriers and can help you muddle through the confusion .
In Montana Yes you can . If someone has given you permission to drive the car then you are covered unless they have you excluded from the policy . But keep in mind that with most carriers when they are signing the policy they are stating that they have listed all drivers that live in the household and have access to the vehicle . If you are driving the car on a regular basis they should be listing you on the policy . I would talk to a local agent and also check the state you live in for the guidelines they require . In Most cases the insurance follows the car 1st and the driver second .
In Montana you can not legally own a car titled in your name only you would have to have an adult on the title . In that case they would have insure the car or you can get insurance but you would have to list the adult as a driver . also which would make the rates much lower then on your own . The carriers that we use at our agency the average teen with a clean driving record cost about 100 a month with liability only on most 4 door cars trucks are a bit more . . I would talk to a local agent and find out what your state guidelines are
In Montana and in many state the answer is no because you have no insurable interest . But you can get what is called a non-owned policy that covers you driving any car for liability only so long as you do not have a car titled in your name . The policy is very reasonable as far as rates go and protect you if you hurt someone in and accident and also protects you if you are hurt in an accident and have un insured motorist and under insured motorist . The reason you can not insure someone else 's auto is the insurance company in the event of a claim would have to issue the payment for the carthat you were driving wasdamaged the check would have to go to the owner of the car .
That is a very open question there are many factors when it comes to your rates in the state you are in did you know that you can go to your states insurance commissioners office website and many times they will have a list of the carriers and the average rates that are in your area ? in Montana we are the 6th highest state for rates I recommend you check out your states insurance commissioners office they are full of resources in Montana the average rate it $ 50 a month to $ 200 depending on what area of the state you live in
There are many carriers that have policies called non owned policy they are fairly inexpensive depending on your age and the state you live in . The policy only covers the liability portion and un insured and under insured if you choose the option of that which is highly recommended . It will not repair the car that you are driving but cover damages done to others . Depending on your state laws . Here in Montana the insurance follows the car first then the driver 2nd which means if you were driving a friends car and they gave you permission and you got into an accident their insurance would cover the 1st portion the 2nd would be your non owned policy because they gave you permission to use their car then permissive use would mean that their insurance liability would be responsible now his insurance may try and get some of the loss covered by your insurance . Check with your state guidelines . Or talk to a local agent .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
The Laws in Montana are Different Brandon . You must have your own insurance policy even if it is a non owned policy . The rental companies will sell you insurance but is for the comp and collision portion . I insuremany rental car business across the state and none of them will rent you a car unless you have at least liability on your own . Yes you can purchase insurance from that does include liability and comp and collision . We always recommend you purchase from a rental company the coverage they offer that way in the event of a claim it does n't effect your personal auto insurance .
In Montana you able to purchase insurance at that age but you are not allowed to own a car in only your name till your 18 . so If you were to purchase insurance you would have to have your parents or parent listed as a driver which also would make the insurance much cheaper . Or you could purchase what is called a non-owned auto policy that would cover you for liability to others but would not repair the car you were driving . I recommend you check your states laws which you can find on your states website . Or talk to a local agent in your area .
The first thing you need to do is look at your coverage . Part `` A '' is your dwelling coverage which means your home . Make sure that your home is valued correctly . Some carriers use replacement cost so you need to make sure that you are no over insured or under insured . Also make sure that they have the correct property address . I had a client come in who had a policy on a home that was very high and after looking at the papers the carrier had been insuring the wrong home for 6 years Many times a Mutual carrier will be less depending on the type of home and the area you live in . In many cases they are less because they are no affected by natural disasters from other states which can affect everyone premium . In some cases this year alone I have seen Rates double with some carriers that had many claims from other states and here in Montana the mutual companies are less because they are all Montana based only . Shop around and most important is to make sure that you are covered properly . In the even of a total loss being insured for the wrong valuecan be a HUGE problem
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Work ?
Renters insurance can be very beneficial . As far as `` Does it work '' the answer is yes . to give you an example we had an insured with 5 small children and they lived in an home they were renting they lost everything clothes toys and everything they owned . Not only did they get 40 thousand dollars to replace the belonging but they also had 3,000 to cover the expense to stay in a motel given back to them all for $ 100 a year for the insurance . Yes renters Insurance works
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
Yes an apartment complex can require you to obtain renters insurance as a condition of renting their apartment . What apartments are concerned about is liability protection . Should the tenant be liable for bodily injury or property damage the apartment complex does not want to be the first in line to be sued for something the tenant caused . Instead the tenants renters insurance policy will defend against the loss first . The apartment complex will not care if you chose to carry coverage for your own personal property . Also on a side note if the tenant did not carry renters insurance and was sued for a loss , just because the apartment complex may have to defend does not give a free pass to the tenant . Your still going to court and it can cost you thousands . Renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers you for so much . Buy it .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
For the vast majority of renters , a renters insurance policy is optional . Some landlords will require that the tenant own a renters insurance policy and name them as an additional insured . It is important to note , however , that as a renter you are responsible for injuries and accidents that happen on the rented property . You are also responsible for damage to the unit and if your property is damaged because of a covered peril , your landlord is not responsible to make you whole . Those are things that a renters policy does .
Renters insurance is about the same rate with all carriers . The average renters policy in Montana is bout $ 100 a year with $ 30,000 worth of contents and $ 100,000 in Liability limits with $ 5,000 in medical pay and a $ 500.00 deductible . Most carriers are between $ 10 to $ 15 a month . The only advantage in choosing some carriers is that if you already have an auto policy with the same carrier then it can lower your auto insurance . Example I have a client that has a carrier in our agency for her auto but they carrier does n't let agents sell the renters policy you can only get it online . But what she did was get the renters policy online for $ 100 a year but it lowered her car insurance $ 80 every 6 months hence it was almost like getting paid to have the renters insurance . I would talk to your local agent and see if they have any package deals since renters policies are so inexpensive but well worth the investment .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Is Car Insurance For A 18 Year Old In Texas ?
This is a very broad question . There are so many different factors that affect rating . Age is a big factor when we are refferring to individuals below age 25 , however it is n't the only factor . I would recommend you to shop around . Each insurance company weigh age differently .
This is a very complicated subject . In California all the drivers in a household are included on an auto policy . Parents dont want the additional expense of insuring their cars with an inexperienced driver in the household . Some purchase a car and place the car in the 18 year olds name . They then buy the cheapest auto insurance with just the bare legal limits . The problem arises when the inexperienced driver injures others in an accident and the injured party starts suing . The lawyers will not stop at the limits of the policy purchased for the 18 year old . I have seen them even go after grandparents who loaned money to the 18 year old . Your only recourse is the low limit policy purchased for the car . The rest of the lawsuit comes after everything that you own . It is usually cheaper to include the inexperienced driver on the family policy . If you add another car you can isolate the expense to that car but at least you can have the advantages of discounts and perhaps save yourself from bankruptcy down the road .
Full coverage auto insurance for an 18 year-old can vary , depending on many factors . For example , the type of vehicle , and driving record of the teenager will greatly influence the rate . If the car is financed , the type of coverage will be different which will impact the cost . Finding the lowest rare is critical so you do n't overpay . As an experienced broker -LRB- with 33 years of experience -RRB- , we manage a top-rated website -LRB- see profile -RRB- that offers free online quotes . In moments , consumers can view the cheapest car insurance rates for an 18-year old . Another important factor is that often , when you turn 19 , insurers will discount the rate , especially if you have three years of driving experience . The price reduction could be substantial , A good-student discount -LRB- if you are in school -RRB- , will also reduce premiums , often by hundreds of dollars .
Auto insurance for an 18-year old can be fairly affordable or quite expensive . The rate depends on the type of vehicle that is being insured , the driving record of the person applying for coverage and where they live . And yes , males are more expensive to drive , which I always found to be quite ironic considering my sisters were the persons in an accident , not me ! Of course , that was 40 years ago . Re the rates of the 18-year old , perhaps as low as $ 50 per month or much much higher . Shopping the top-rated companies will help and that 's what experienced brokers like us will do .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
At what age can you get life insurance ? Usually `` you '' can purchase life insurance from the age of 18 on . Life insurance is considered a contract and in order to have a binding contract both parties must be of legal age . An insurance company can not contract with a 10 year old or a 15 year old legally . So how did my kids get life insurance before age ten ? Because I `` own '' the policies as their parent . I had an insurable interest to insure my kids and I went into a contract with an insurance carrier . My kids are simply the insured and because at the time of purchase they were not of age to be party to a legal contract , they can only be the insured until 18 and I could sign over ownership at that point in time .
You will need a new vehicle registration in Texas and with it a new Texas policy . there are honestly some differences in coverage that are routine in Texas and not so much in Georgia . For example in Texas you typically can buy PIP which is Personal Injury Protection which affords you and your passengers some coverages including wage loss that are not usually offered in GA. . In Ga most folks have medical payments coverage in lieu of PIP . It is not the same but is more limited . Keep in mind that much of auto insurance revolves around complying with state law . The DMV in both states gets a data feed form the companies on policies as they incept and as they are cancelled . With the situation you describe I think our agency may uniquely able to assist you . We currently are licensed in both states and can assist with your transition . So give us a call 1 - 866-933-4372
Yes typically it is covered and covered on a replacement cost basis . Due to the frequency of major hail and windstorms in several states , we are seeing several companies offer only Actual cash value for older rooftops . So be sure you understand what your coverage is and how it will respond to a hail or windstorm -LRB- tornado or hurricane -RRB- . In some state per cent deductibles have been in use for decades such as in Texas . However much of the country has dollar amount deductibles . Also be aware that coverage is not automatically available in the voluntary market in all areas of coastal states So if you live in the fourteen counties in Texas along the Gulf or in Florida every where , you may have to obtain wind and hail coverage through a residual market mechanism such as the Texas Wind Insurance Association or Citizens Property Insurance in FL . A local agent in any coastal state should be a good starting point to understand what is available and where in your part of the country .
It 's going to depend on a number of factors including whether the 18 year old is a male or female , their medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , the amount of coverage you 're looking to secure and how long you want it guaranteed for . Many individuals look at securing a guaranteed universal life or whole life policy for an individual at such a young age as they can reasonably expect to live for a long time , meaning the rates are much much lower than someone who is in their 30 's , 50 's , 60 's , etc. , where the number of years of remaining life expectancy would be less . Consult with an independent insurance agent/broker to see what plans are available and what structure would be best suitable to meet your needs . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like assistance with your and your family 's life insurance needs .
Cheap car insurance for 18 year-olds may be available through selected carriers . Finding the lowest rate is best accomplished when you work with an experienced broker . There is no cost or obligation , and the potential savings can be substantial . Although the least expensive rate is not always the best option , the combination of low rates and great coverage is what brokers -LRB- experienced ones -RRB- find the best . If your policy will be taken out by an adult , they should be consulted . As you get older , your cost will reduce , and save you quite a bit of money . But most importantly , having the most appropriate deductibles and liability limits may save you much more ! LIVE answer provided by Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker with more than 33 years of experience and owner of several nationally top-rated websites that offer consumers the lowest available rates .
The standard renters insurance policy form , the HO-4 , often contains language giving you 30 days of coverage at both your old home and your `` newly acquired principal residence . '' However , it 's important to inform your insurance agent of the move . If you move to a lower risk area , doing so may even save you a few dollars . Since insurance policies vary by individual state laws , if you move between states your insurance agent will write a new policy for the new state and transfer money you 've pre-paid to the new policy . Be aware that not all renters insurance policies are written on the HO-4 form . For example , the HO-BT policy form which is specific to Texas renters insurance will cover the personal property at each location only based on the proportion of the total property which is at that location . The HO-BT also provides the lesser of $ 1,000 or 10 % of the total personal property coverage for property in transit between your old home and your new one .
Yes , a person under 18 can be the beneficiary of a life insurance policy . You should have provisions set up in your will to designate a guardian/trust to control the funds until he/she is old enough to claim them , otherwise a judge will decide who will be given guardianship.A life insurance trustcan be very useful in this instance if you want to control how and when the proceeds are paid out . Many times , a parent may want their child 's access to the monies be given in installments -LRB- e.g. giving a quarter of it to them when they turn 18 , a quarter when they turn 21 , a quarter when they turn 25 , and a quarter when they turn 30 -RRB- to make sure that the monies last and are not spend unwisely .
Cheap car insurance rates for an 18-year old -LRB- and other teenagers -RRB- can only be found by shopping the right way . There are dozens of carrier that offer coverage , and for a young driver , prices could vary by as much as 80 % . An experienced -LRB- preferably 20 years in the business -RRB- broker -LRB- and our websites -RRB- guide you through the shopping process by helping select the companies with the best offers . And yes , if your grades are good , you 'll save money !
You can get health insurance online in Texas ! The easiest and most efficient way to obtain the best rates and best coverage is through an experienced broker . That 's our job and why we have top-rated websites . The . gov website is still not free from glitches , delays and security concerns . And most experienced health insurance brokers can offer `` off-Exchange '' plans which you can not get through the government website . A broker will help determine the amount of your federal subsidy , so you can view how much your Texas health insurance rate will reduce and which options are the best . If you missed Open Enrollment , a broker can review short-term plan options and other viable choices .
The Texas Health Insurance Exchange was created to give Texas residents the opportunity to purchase affordable medical coverage from the top insurers in the state . Open Enrollment will begin October 1 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and policies will be effective in 2014 . Texas consumers can buy single , family and small business healthcare through the Exchange or with the help of experienced licensed brokers -LRB- and websites -RRB- . The new federal tax subsidy could possibly reduce premiums for persons that qualify . The `` Federal Poverty Level '' will be used to calculate eligibility and amount of the subsidy . Licensed and/or experienced brokers can also assist with this calculation .
Car insurance rates on an 18-year old female will be lower than rates on a male ! And perhaps by quite a bit . But your exact premium depends on many factors including your age , where you live , your driving record and perhaps other variables . If the car is titled to a parent -LRB- highlyrecommended -RRB- , you 'll probably pay less than having to insure the vehicle on a separate policy . You 'll also retain many discounts that your parents currently receive .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
Most insurance companies will perform whats called a `` needs analysis '' to gauge how much your family and or surviving children would need in the event of your death . A good place to start is to add up your total outstanding financial obligations , whether it be a car loan , or credit card debt . Then , look at how much you make per year multiplied by the amount of years until your youngest child for example turns 18 . Factor in college tuition and living expenses . This is only a recommendation , an official needs analysis would need to be done to determine the exact amount needed for survivors .
Obamacare is working well in California . Obamacare was intended to help Americans who could not previously afford health insurance get insured . People with bad health -LRB- heart disease , obesity , cancer -RRB- often were denied coverage or charged a very high premium . Now these folks are charged the same rate as everyone else . People with low income were often priced out of the insurance market as well . It was not reasonable to expect a person making $ 25,000 a year to spend 15 % of their income on health insurance . Under ObamaCare people making under $ 48,000 per year are eligible for premium assistance . WEBSITELINK - In this video I show you how a 30 year old earning $ 25,000 per year can get a policy for just $ 18 per month .
Pure Term Life insurance has premiums that increase every year as you get older . Most people do n't like a premium that goes up every year so they decide how long they need the insurance and level out the premiums by buying level premium term . When you do this you are paying extra in the earlier years in order to level out the premium in the later years of your level premium period . That is why 1-year term is much cheaper than 20-year term . When you buy term life insurance , you should determine how long you want the premium to be level and buy it for that length . For instance if your mortgage is paid off in 18-more years , you should buy a 20-year level term policy if the mortgage payoff is the reason for the insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Life Insurance Pay For Funeral Expenses ?
Life insurance pays the face amount to the beneficiary who can then use the money to pay for the funeral expenses . You can also sign over the policy to the funeral home and the company would pay the funeral home directly . How you choose to set it up depends on the circumstances and size of he policy . If you or your loved one is in poor health and may be going into a nursing home a good agent familiar with Medicaid laws can help you make the right choice and provide options that will protect you from Medicaid spend down . A younger person with a large face amount would want to make his spouse or trust the beneficiary . Again , a good agent can help set this up for you .
Life insurance pays the benefit at death and is paid tax-free . That makes it the perfect emergency fund to cover funeral expenses . Some policies are actually designed to pay funeral expenses with . Thy pay the death claim within 24-hours of death and do not require a death certificate to settle the death claim . They will work with your funeral director to verify the death . ForeThought Life Insurance Company would be . Popular choice for this type of policy .
The key word in this question is `` cover '' . All life insurance can be used toward that purpose if the beneficiary chooses to use it that way . Policies can be made with a Funeral Home as the beneficiary but only one kind of policy will answer the question of `` will it cover '' . When I first entered the insurance profession in 1957 we sold a $ 1,000 or $ 2,000 ordinary -LRB- permanent , whole -RRB- life policy for a person wanting funeral expense coverage . As I increased my knowledge in the insurance industry I went to including a `` Final Expense '' amount in the practice of total planning of a persons insurance needs . At that time we figured $ 10,000 sufficient to meet the needs of final hospital expenses , taxes , burial , etc. . It was not until I was Executive Vice President of a company that was sold to a company that wrote burial insurance policies through the funeral home . I became licensed with the new company and learned , at a much older age , that there is only one policy that can REALLY say it will cover funeral costs at the persons death . That policy is available through funeral homes , it is an increasing whole life policy that the funeral home accepts for the purchase of a funeral at a specific time and then guarantees to give that equivalent funeral whenever the person dies without any further cost except some expense that might be beyond those spelled out in the contract . I began to teach classes for CE on this kind of policy for our state and for many insurance agencies . This is a completely different policy that can be of great benefit to a local independent agent working with a local funeral home . As I began to teach about this type of Life Insurance I found most Life Insurance agents had never heard of it or had been sold against it by companies writing supposed , last expense , death benefit policies . I have now written this type of policy for almost 20 years and the families of the deceased have nothing but praise for a properly planned REAL Funeral Policy . At 81 years old the death benefit of my funeral policy now exceeds the death benefit of the first policy I bought for total family protection . If I am blessed with a few more years it may equal what I used to think was a huge Life Insurance policy . I am still writing these policies on my friends . I have learned one thing over the years ! In the insurance business never close your mind to a type of policy until you have totally studied it yourself rather than being sold a bill of goods by a company that may not have the policy you are trying to learn about . Worry about that client , first and foremost , and do the best job you possibly can for that individual by increasing your knowledge of this business . I have covered some of the aspects of this policy in my recently published second edition of `` The Prophets Dollar '' , available on Amazon .
No your life insurance can be used for any purpose your beneficiary wants to use it for . It has nothing to do with a funeral . Unless it 's a preneed funeral insurance plan purchased from a funeral home . Actually a funeral preneed life insurance policy does not have to be used for a funeral either . The funeral contract can be canceled by you at any time and the life insurance proceeds can be left to the beneficiary of your choice . If you are on Medicaid assistance it would be just like any other life insurance if you canceled the funeral contract and would be exposed to counting as an asset . Do not confuse final expense life insurance which is just simplified underwriting whole-life insurance and preneed funeral life insurance which has other features and guarantees than most any other life insurance . They are two different things .
Many types of life insurance will work to pay a funeral . The absolute best kind if covering a funeral is your main goal is the Preneed funeral insurance that is sold by funeral homes . Those policies have several features that most insurance just does n't have . 1 . They are a limited pay policy . You will have the policy paid in full in your choice of 3 years , 5-years or 10-years or you can pay in full with one single payment . 2 . They have inflation protection . The funeral policies grow each year and the death benefit is designed to keep up with the rate of inflation . Many funeral homes can give you a lifetime price guarantee because of this feature . 3 . They are an exempt asset when qualifying for Medicaid or other assistance . 4 . They are guaranteed issue and everyone has coverage no later than the 12th monthly payment even if you are in a nursing home , under hospice care or have a terminal illness . No other guaranteed issue life insurance can insure you as quickly . 5 . You can buy them on family members with or without their knowledge . If you have a parent that never would insure themself and is going to leave a burden on you , you can take out a funeral policy on them . They do not need to sign anything or answer any health questions . 6 . All funeral Preneed life insurance policies will pay the death claim within 48-hours of your death with no death certificate required . If are on a tight budget , a funeral Preneed policy may be too expensive for you . In that case any whole-life policy will work . There are many simplified issue policies that will sell smaller amounts and offer and affordable premium . They are very easy to qualify for even if you do not have perfect health .
I have been a Certified Preplanning Consultant and preplanned over $ 1,000,000 of funerals through a local funeral home , with many of them funding their funerals at the same time . It gave me a deep appreciation and understanding for what is needed , and the creative ways that people pay for , their final expense needs . I have come to believe that purchasing a life insurance policy on your own is an excellent way to pay funeral costs . You can assign the policy to the funeral home , if you wish , with a stipulation that the remainder of the death benefit go to your beneficiaries . This is even allowable in a Medicaid spend down . To ensure that your funeral costs do not exceed that amount , you may pick out the items for your funeral or memorial service , and sign a contract for the cost -LRB- the funeral home will probably want to add a modest increase each year , so your policy will need to be little larger than the cost of the funeral you have chosen -RRB- . Or you may leave the proceeds to a family member who you trust to pay for the type of services you desire . Again , the excess death benefit can go to pay for other costs associated with your passing , or to your beneficiary 's personal needs . When my father died last year , our funeral director went so far as to submit the death claim for us . Dad 's having personal life insurance for that purpose was a huge blessing to our family . I highly recommend it .
In Ohio if the cash value of a life insurance policy and other assets is greater than $ 1500 you must spend down . When it come to life insurance you have a few options depending on how long you have had the policy . Prepay your Funeral , assign the policy to the funeral home , or purchase a Funeral Trust with the cash value in the policy . A Funeral Trust policy irrevocably assigns the death benefit of a life insurance policy to a Funeral Trust set up by the insurance company and can only be paid out for expenses directly related to the funeral and final expenses . This makes the policy Medicaid Exempt . In Ohio you can put up to $ 15000 in a Funeral Trust . In some states you would need a Goods and Services contract to go along with the Trust . Your agent should be able to help you with that . If you cash surrender the policy the money can not be gifted to your beneficiary , you must spend it on yourself or use it in the ways mentioned above . There are rules in place that can preserve some of your assets . A good Medicaid Care Resource Planner or Elder Law attorney can help you with that issue .
Yes , Life Insurance pays for funeral bills and any other expenses associated with final expense needs . The funeral life insurance policy can be purchased for any face amount with a relative or friend as the beneficiary , plus a collateral assignment to the funeral home . That way the funeral home will get what they are owed with the remainder going to your beneficiary . Having Life Insurance for funeral needs is handy because it not only can cover the funeral , but cemetery , transportation for special guests to get to the funeral , and other costs that are incurred upon death . In fact , the remainder of the death benefit can be used for anything at all that the beneficiary chooses to spend it on .
Medicare does not pay anything for funeral costs . It is important to purchase a final expense policy , either through a private insurance agency -LRB- allowing the benefit to be paid to your beneficiary and the proceeds beyond the cost of your funeral can go to other uses -RRB- or with a funeral home . The benefit of life insurance is paid quickly and tax free , allowing your loved ones to grieve your loss rather than worry about how to pay for your funeral .
Certainly life insurance proceeds can be used for funeral expenses . The beneficiary can decide what expenses can be paid for with the proceeds . The exception would be if the life insurance proceeds were to be dictated by a trust . I would recommend a good attorney in those cases . One can also buy a final expense plan in which the funeral home can be the beneficiary and the money would pay off the funeral . In most cases if prepaying a funeral that money is placed in an annuity and any proceeds after the funeral is paid go to the remaining family .
Yes , life insurance can be used for funeral expenses or anything else your beneficiary would choose . The life insurance policy designated especially for funeral expenses is called a final expense plan . However , any type of life insurance be it whole life , universal life or term life insurance proceeds can be used for funeral and final expenses . Life insurance proceeds can also be used for repaying debts , funding a child 's education or invested to replace the income of a loved one 's income . The nice benefit about life insurance proceeds if set up properly are tax free .
Coming up with the funds necessary to pay for a funeral and final expenses can be a problem for many families . Even if the deceased had sufficient life insurance , the funeral home often wants to be paid up front . In order to deal with this problem , most funeral homes will accept an assignment of the life insurance policy . The beneficiary can complete an assignment form where they are authorizing the life insurance to pay the funeral home for their services directly from the death benefit when the claim is paid . By doing this the funeral home is secure in knowing that their fees will be paid by the insurance company and therefor will not require prepayment . When the life insurance company processes the claim they will send a check directly to the funeral home and the balance of the death benefit will be paid to the beneficiary .
Yes , Life Insurance will pay for funerals if you want it to pay for funerals . The person taking out the policy can leave the proceeds of the policy to a funeral home , or to a trust that will pay the funeral home , or to a beneficiary who will pay for the funeral bill with proceeds from the life insurance policy . Life insurance will pay for whatever the Insured person and/or beneficiary desires .
Life insurance proceeds are spent at the direction of the beneficiary . Frequently the beneficiary uses the proceeds of a life insurance policy to pay final expenses including funeral expenses . Some policies are arranged in such a way as to insure that the proceeds pay funeral costs . These policies are marketed through various funeral homes . However , if the beneficiary is a natural person and doesnt want to use the proceeds for a funeral , that is entirely their decision .
Many funeral homes will accept an assignment of a life insurance policy in order to pay for final expenses . Your beneficiary can give the funeral home the details of your life insurance policy -LRB- company , acct # , etc. -RRB- and the home will contact the company to verify that the policy is in force . Your beneficiary can then sign an assignment form in lieu of paying the funeral home directly . When the life insurance company pays the claim they will send a check for the amount owed directly to the funeral home , then the balance will be paid to your beneficiary .
Life insurance pays the benefit at death and is paid tax-free . That makes it the perfect emergency fund to cover funeral expenses . Some policies are actually designed to pay funeral expenses with . Thy pay the death claim within 24-hours of death and do not require a death certificate to settle the death claim . They will work with your funeral director to verify the death . ForeThought Life Insurance Company would be . Popular choice for this type of policy .
Yes . Paying for funeral expenses was one of the primary reasons for the invention of life insurance , right after providing some degree of financial security for the family and/or loved ones the insured leaves behind . Funeral homes have a high degree of expertise in working with life insurance companies to coordinate the payment for their services with the life insurance carrier . While this can be of great comfort to bereaved family members at the time of loss of a loved one , a person should exercise caution in these situations . Funeral homes after all are a business and they are in business to make a profit . Most funeral homes are honorable and reputable but as with any industry there are those who operate on the margins to put it politely . Giving them the keys to the kingdom when a person is emotionally distressed is often unwise and can leave a person vulnerable to lots of `` upselling '' and excessive expenses . It is always wise to attempt to make plans for funeral arrangements well in advance of the actual need .
The right kind of life insurance can be used to cover a funeral . Do n't count on paying for your funeral with term life insurance or insurance through your employer . The term will usually end before you die . The employer insurance is not a good plan for funeral planning because most people live to retirement age which is after the employer insurance ends . For funeral planning either buy a prepaid funeral plan from a funeral home or make sure you have at least 10,000 of guaranteed whole-life insurance . Either of those will work fine .
Medicaid does n't actually `` take '' your life insurance . You just ca n't qualify for Medicaid assistance if you have more countable assets than Medicaid allows . In most states $ 2,000 is the total allowed to qualify for Medicaid assistance . Checking and savings accounts , retirement money , cash value of life insurance , etc. all count against you when qualifying for Medicaid . Many people will cash surrender their life insurance to qualify for Medicaid . You can also irrevocably assign it to your funeral home and it will be exempt but must be all used for funeral expenses if you do that . An actual funeral preplan life insurance policy that you purchase from a funeral home is always exempt from Medicaid .
In order to determine how much life insurance coverage to get , single persons should start by thinking about what others would need to pay off for them . Life insurance is a fast and easy way to settle bills , and it is especially helpful for survivors to have these ready funds when there is not a spouse to take care of the estate . The bills might be credit card debt , a school loan , utilities until the home is sold , etc. . Next , how much do you want to leave for your funeral or memorial service ? You can pick out cemetery plot , casket , urn , and so many things ahead of time , then have life insurance to pay for it all . What is remaining after expenses can go to the beneficiary ; you do n't have to leave it all to the funeral home . Finally , do you want to leave any funds to special people in your life or to a charity ? Life insurance is a good way to make a small amount of money stretch into a big gift . You may have other things this prompted you to think of , that could be covered by a life insurance policy . But these three - debts , final expenses and gifts - are the main ones that I can see being well served by having a life insurance policy as a single person .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Hide Smoking From Life Insurance Companies ?
I certainly would n't try to hid nicotine from a life insurance application . There are policies that do n't require medical but they will find out when they pull your medical records . It is n't a good idea to fib for this will be in your insurance history for life , all health , life etc applications can see your trail and history of how questions are answered . Here 's what I suggest , buy a small term life insurance policy , work on quitting and when you are successfully clean after 12 months , shop again for life insurance , at 12 months clean you are able to qualify for preferred rates pending there are n't any other issues . Good luck !
Do n't even try it . Hiding tobacco use from the carrier initially may not be that difficult , but when it comes claim time the carrier will fight tooth and nail if they even think you lied on your application . Keep your answers on your application honest to avoid a non-payment of claims in the event of an untimely death .
Can you hide smoking from life insurance companies ? I have certainly had clients try it . How do I know ? Because they got caught . Once they answered `` no '' to the tobacco question and then evidence of recent smoking was found in their urine or medical records , from then on , all their answers were suspect . Underwriters use some personal judgement in assessing risk , and when a lie is discovered on the application , they are not quick to offer the benefit of the doubt for anything else . Not only that , but you end up paying tobacco rates with a company that may not have the best tobacco rates . When agents know up front what we are dealing with , we are much better able to get you with the lowest priced policy from the start .
Any attempt to defraud an insurance company by concealing material fact or omission may cause your beneficiaries claim to the proceeds of the policy to be denied . It could also constitute outright fraud which could lead to a civil suits . The application is forthright in it 's questions on smoking and not to mention the urine test will ferret out the nicotine levels in you system . Do n't try to game the system . You 'll lose in the end .
It is possible to hide your smoking from the insurance company . Chances are the underwriter is not going to poll your neighbors to find out if they 've seen you smoking . However , when you apply for your policy the company will require you to give a blood and urine test . Most of the time they are checking for cotinine with is a metabolite of nicotine . Lying about your smoking on a life insurance application is a material misrepresentation . Life insurance companies can challenge paying claims in cases of fraud . Some courts have determined that lying about smoking usage to get a lower rate is fraud .
Can you hide smoking from life insurance companies ? I have certainly had clients try it . How do I know ? Because they got caught . Once they answered `` no '' to the tobacco question and then evidence of recent smoking was found in their urine or medical records , from then on , all their answers were suspect . Underwriters use some personal judgement in assessing risk , and when a lie is discovered on the application , they are not quick to offer the benefit of the doubt for anything else . Not only that , but you end up paying tobacco rates with a company that may not have the best tobacco rates . When agents know up front what we are dealing with , we are much better able to get you with the lowest priced policy from the start .
Yes , Life Insurance carriers make good on their contracts all the time . If an individual had a life insurance policy in force and dies , his or her family will receive the death benefit proceeds . The insurance carriers will look for information about the cause of death . If no foul play or false reports a death benefit claim will be paid . It is important to be open and honest when filling out an application . Do not hide the fact if you are a smoker or have a family history of depression . We respect your privacy . It is always better to disclose this information upfront . After the ` two year ' contestability period , if you stopped smoking for more than one year and have no other health issues you should renegotiate the cost of insurance with the insurance carrier . It could end of saving you money over the length of your contract . The point is do not avoid purchasing life insurance or lie on the application because you smoke or have high blood pressure . You can always go back and renegotiate the cost of insurance . By misrepresenting information about yourself on the application you could put your family at risk in the event of death and a claim not being paid .
Hard to answer such a question without any details . But in general , I would n't worry too much about it . Fraud is so out of control , that they have to investigate certain claims . During the claims process , companies have their set of `` red flags '' that triggers further investigation . As long as you have nothing to hide , you should n't worry about it too much . They may ask for things such as : - bank statements - proof of residency - receipt from last oil change - etc. , etc. , etc. . Sometimes innocent minor things can trigger a red flag , and it ends up being no big deal . Other times , fraud is suspected . And sometimes , a high dollar amount of loss can trigger an investigation simply for due diligence . So do n't sweat it . If you have nothing to hide , give them what they want and you should be fine .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
As you are reading the answers to this question , you are being introduced to several different agents who could handle your application in a responsible manner . You can go to our profiles to read about our agencies and our expertise , or you can read our answers to other questions to get a feel for how we approach our clients . There is not much we can hide as we are in the public eye here . You can go to any agent you trust , but if you do n't know any , this website is a good place to start .
A life insurance blood test is mainly looking for signs of illness , nicotine , or drug use . Many people are unaware that they have a health condition when they apply for life insurance . Life insurance exams periodically expose type 2 diabetes or high cholesterol , and enable the applicant to be treated before serious damage results . And , of course , there are those who try to hide drug or nicotine usage . So those three things are the main thing a life insurance exam looks for .
Yes . As long as the driver is licensed and has the owner 's permission to drive the vehicle . But the term `` occasional '' means different things to different companies . Some companies are more strict about it than others . The rule of thumb is : list everyone living in your household that is above driving age . And list anyone else who does n't live with you , but has regular access to your vehicle . A lot of people get burnt on this because they try to hide their high school aged kids from being on their policy ... . Huge mistake !
It is possible that you will see an increase in your Homeowners ' premium at renewal if you make a claim . That is tending to be the common practice among Home Insurance providers , generally speaking . While some claims can not be avoided - those resulting from severe storms for example , you can reduce the possibility of a claim by properly maintaining your home and property . Trim over hanging tree branches and shrubbery around your home . These simple examples can reduce the risk of a tree falling on your roof or someone using your landscaping to hide a break in .
You can search for a life insurance policy by looking through the deceased person 's financial records , checking out places they might hide documents , asking their family members if they mentioned purchasing life insurance , contacting a local agent they may have used , or calling insurance companies that you know they liked . You do not have to find a hard copy of the policy to collect the death benefit . After a few years , the policy may show up as unclaimed property on state notices .
Some other places to look other than those places that Jerry Vanderzanden mentioned in his answer would be on the deceased persons pay stub . Some times an insured may buy a `` Voluntary Life '' plan through work and you may be able to find mention of the company or policy number on his or her pay statement . Many credit card companies and banks offer accidental death type policies for their customers , so those statements may be a good place to look , also safety deposit boxes are favorite hiding places for life policies .
Do n't even try it . Hiding tobacco use from the carrier initially may not be that difficult , but when it comes claim time the carrier will fight tooth and nail if they even think you lied on your application . Keep your answers on your application honest to avoid a non-payment of claims in the event of an untimely death .
Generally married children can not be on the parents policy . What happens if you try to hide this `` material fact '' and you have an accident and now you need to file a claim ? Usually if you are on your `` parents '' policy the parent is the `` primary '' driver and you are a child that just drives your parents car sporadically . If you or your spouse have a vehicle and you have the car financed in your name and your parents are not on the note-can you say Red Flag ?
Yes , high cholesterol DOES affect life insurance rates . It is important to disclose any and all health issues when applying for life insurance . Sometimes , you can get a slightly better rate if you disclose all issues on the application , rather than trying to hide something . In most cases , these health issues will turn up on physician reports and/or med exams and if you 're not honest up front , insurance companies will place you in a lower high-risk bracket that you did not apply for . It is important to remember that not all health issues are `` knock outs '' , especially if they happened some time ago .
Your spouse unless specifically excluded will be covered under your auto insurance policy . However you are required to report your spouse as an operator . The insurance provider would ask you this question when filling out an application . Especially if you state you are married . If you claim your spouse has no licenses and does not drive and then turns out she is driving you may have a problem . There is no allowance for hiding household operators .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is A Cheap Car Insurance For Young Drivers ?
Auto isurance rate vary from carrier to carrier and geographic location to geographic location . Call local agents in your area to discuss coverage availability and pricing . Select an agent that you feel comfortable working with and that you will do the best job looking out for your 's and your family 's coverage needs .
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
Statistically young drivers present the greatest risk for a claim to an insurance carrier due to their inexperience behind the wheel . Young drivers are more likely to be involved in some sort of questionable or reckless activity . This does mean that every young driver is irresponsible or that they will be involved in activities that will cause a claim . Many young drivers are more responsible and less reckless than older drivers but insurance carriers tend to create rates based on age and geographic location as major factors .
what is the best type of life insurance for young people ? In my opinion dividend paying whole life is the best choice for young people who have not yet put themselves in such debt that the option of whole life has to take a back seat to debt protection . For young people whole life is a great choice as the price is cheap , the benefit is large and the price is locked in . It is the absolute best window of opportunity to take advantage of what whole life can do .
This is not always the case there are some carriers that actually give you young driver discount and also if you have good grades that help . The main reason it is higher is because you are less experienced driver and are more likely to have an accident but there are many factors for this . Also the type of car you drive makes a difference also . I insure a 17 yr old who is on her own policy and has had tickets and drives a 2 door car and with just liability is only $ 160 a month that is not a bad rate as here inMontana the average young driver you can figures is 100 a month before you even think about adding a car this is being added to another policy . My recommendations are to talk to a local agent and see what type of discounts they offer for younger drivers and if you are being listed on another persons policy or not .
The cheapest car insurance for young will depend on your state and zip code . If you are a Maryland resident and you are between the agesof 16 and 20 , it will be very difficult not impossible to find insurance in the standard market . Some exceptions to this is when the Child goes on Parents Insurance policy . In Maryland , MAIF or the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund insures most young and inexperience drivers or experience driver with accidents and tickets . They must have been declined coverage by at least two standard insurance companies or none renewed by one to qualify for coverage with MAIF . In some cases Progressive may also be good with young drivers but their rates are better if the driver is at least 21 and have good credit score Hope this helps .
Cheap car insurance rates for an 18-year old -LRB- and other teenagers -RRB- can only be found by shopping the right way . There are dozens of carrier that offer coverage , and for a young driver , prices could vary by as much as 80 % . An experienced -LRB- preferably 20 years in the business -RRB- broker -LRB- and our websites -RRB- guide you through the shopping process by helping select the companies with the best offers . And yes , if your grades are good , you 'll save money !
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
The obvious answer is to check with several local insurance agencies for pricing evaluations . Insurance prices are often a serious issue for many families , of course . There is definitive sensitivity to family budgets , However , being driven by the lowest prices is going to result in purchasing low liability limits . Think in terms of each young driver having at least one at-fault accident in the next 12-18 months . Then think how much damage might occur , in each occurrence . Let 's say your first young family driver , due to inattentiveness - -LRB- remember when you were a young driver ? -RRB- - rear-ends a fairly new mid-priced automobile , causing $ 5,000 in damages . Worse , the driver of the other vehicle claims to have sustained neck and back pains , goes to an attorney and starts the process of accumulating medical expenses . Not uncommon at all . Now , add an alleged injured passenger in the car that was rear-ended . Do some quick math as to the possible costs and keep that number in mind when considering how much you might have to pay out-of-pocket , based on the low liability limits that you are weighing , to save money on the premium .
Keeping in mind that cheap is not necessarily the best should you ever need it , I think that one general rule of thumb is that if you are a newly licensed young driver , it will more than likely be less costly to be added to your parent 's auto policy as opposed to having your own . If however , you are going to be purchasing your own car and registering it in your own name , it would be beneficial to talk to your parent 's Insurance Professional about setting up a policy with the same company they have . In many cases you will still qualify for multi-vehicle and multi-policy discounts which will save you money .
Here in CT , one must be at least 16 years of age in order to obtain a drivers license . A 15 year old has the opportunity to obtain a learners ' permit within the regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles , but does not have to be listed as a driver on the parent 's policy . Other states may be different . Once a young driver receives his or her license , then they need to be listed on their parent 's auto policy as a regular driver in their home with access to their vehicles . If the 16 year old purchases a car of their own and wishes to register in in their own name , then they will need to obtain their own separate auto policy in order to accomplish that . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your state and the best options available for both you and your young driver .
Many different statistics are analyzed by iInsurance Companies when developing their rate for various classes of drivers . Over the years , it has been fairly typical that those statistics indicated that inexperienced young male drivers have tended to be involved and or responsible for more auto accidents than have their female counterparts . As a result , rates for young men have been generally higher than those for young women . You and your parents should speak with your Insurance Professional about any and all available discounts in order to help you manage the cost of your car insurance . Ask about discounts for good grades , driver education course completion and bundling along with anoy other options they may have to offer .
Generally speaking , yes , car insurance premiums tend to be higher for younger less experienced drivers . Certainly rates can vary between companies , but paying a bit more for your youthful driver should be something for which you plan . Talk to your Insurance Professional about taking advantage of any available discounts . Your company may offer such discounts for your young driver attending and graduating from a Drivers Ed class . Keeping their grades at `` B '' or better may also help . If you have less cars than drivers , your child could qualify for `` Occasional Driver '' rates .
I am not sure I would call life insurance cheap but it is very affordable for most people . The young and very healthy can purchase life insurance at an amazingly affordable rate . However , as we age , gain weight , health declines and life is more sedimentary , the premiums can really climb for those folks . The best advice is purchase what you need while you are young and healthy and save yourself thousands in premiums over your life time . Remember the actuaries and underwriters are very skilled with predicting a person 's mortality . Take advantage today , we are never going to be any younger or healthier than we are today .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
I love CPA 's . They give great accounting advice and some of them even know other things . But the `` minimum limits '' advice defies his training in some important ways . What your son lacks in `` assets '' he more than makes up for in terms of `` potential '' . What I mean here is that he may not have it now , but due to his young age , he 'll have a long time to earn and pay . Even though he is only 18 does not mean that he can not be responsible for an injury or death , or damage to property , and be subjected to an order of the court to garnishee his wage to make reimbursement to those who were injured , killed , or had property damaged . Now , should have have his own insurance ? Assuming he owns the car , he probably needs his own insurance . Staying in the household under household coverage is also OK but some insurers concern themselves with the owner of the car being different than the insured on the policy so proceed with caution when the vehicle is not actually owned by the policyholder . As a practical matter , the discounts that you might enjoy are lost to the child in many cases when they have their own policy . Some companies will extend multi-policy discounts to children of the policy owner . Some discounts do n't come through this connection , however . I like kids learning the responsibility of maintaining their own insurance . It gets the loss off the parents record , for one . Parents can help subsidize the cost if they want and help provide this as a reward for good outcomes on something else . All things said and done , I like responsible children on their own policies but deal with young drivers both on and off the parents policies so it comes down to personal preference and whether you are dealing with issues that poison the whole policy because of the young driver , or not , in many cases .
Your daughter was not the prominent rating factor for the vehicle . Since you only have two cars and 3 drivers you were rating a spare driver . I would assume the other driver who is not yourself has a impact on the rate . Either a young driver or a driver with some violations may be in play . Actually your agent should be able to look at your policy and easily figure out what is driving the rate . You say she was paying 900.00 for the car she was rated on but actually this would be been inaccurate in the first place . Hard to explain in this type of format . Call your agent to get a better explanation since he or she has details of your policy .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will We Be Required To Have Health Insurance ?
You will be required to have health insurance in 2014 . Oh , that pesky government ! As part of the Affordable Care Act , you will be taxed if you do n't have qualified coverage . Federal tax subsidies will be available and as mentioned below , full-time experienced brokers are the best resources to discuss the topic . Here 's what to do . As experienced brokers , our job is to shop the best carriers in your area , and show you the lowest rates for the coverage you need . It may not be as expensive as you think and you may qualify for a big federal tax subsidy !
Starting in 2014 the PPACA or Obamacare will be operational . All Americans will be required to have health insurance , but not all will pay for health insurance . The health care legislation is based on means testing , so the poor wont pay anything and the middle class could have subsidies . Because it is a federal program , all shortfall of the legislation will be paid be federal tax payers , i.e. only half the country .
I have heard it said that the top life insurance sales people make more money than the top sales people in other industries . This could be true , because large commissions can run it to the millions of dollars . The life insurance business is an ideal environment for making it big . We sell a product that pays well . We represent strong and well established manufactures of this product -LRB- policies -RRB- . We dont have to maintain an inventory . We can develop sales organizations that dont require much labor or overhead . The demand for our services remains constant throughout the ups and downs of the economy . Of course , we have to pay our dues big time . We have to constantly strive to master our field and enhance our professional skills . We have to market , market , market , and then market some more . And we have to invest in every client prior to getting paid . To provide superior service , we need to provide a quote for a rate about which we are confident they will be approved . That can take many hours of work . And remember that life insurance has the most sophisticated and complicated set of eligibility requirements of all financial products . But at the end of the day we know we do outstanding work , and so we earn outstanding pay .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
Well , that is a great question ! As I think about it , I realize that I am 5 people rolled into one . -LRB- Perhaps that is why my wife keeps asking me Just who do you think you are ?! :-RRB- We are hunters . We love to go out and find people with whom we can do business . We are personal coaches . We help our clients clarify their values and set priorities . We are field underwriters . We prepare people for going through the formal application process . We are advocates . We fight tooth and nail to get an approval at the rate quoted , and to solve any and all problems that emerge along the way . We are family friends . Processing life insurance claims is hard on everybody . A death in the family is tough to deal with . We are there for the beneficiaries in any way they need - on top of delivering a check to them .
In order for each state to assure the driver has at least the minimal financial assets to assure each driver they will not be mauled by some irresponsible driver the states require each driver to have car insurance or to post a bond . None of us intends to have an accident but the possibility of having an accident , especially while driving in strange neighborhoods , is a reality . From time to time we find that we have to drive from point A to point B some distance apart that requires we are operating the vehicle for an extended period of time and as we tire the possibility of having an accident increases . The States act in our best interest by requiring minimal financial coverage for every driver
Boy , what a question . For me , it gets to the root of what is wrong with government these days . Im going to speak bluntly because I feel very strongly about this issue . Even though I sell life insurance for a living , I have had extensive experience in the medical insurance marketplace . I am also a consumer , and have to buy the product for myself and my family . And , I am a patriotic American who wants to see our country run the way it should be . Everybody needs medical care . If the insurance marketplace is left to run by its own devices , the vast majority of people will end up with a product that they like , at a price they can afford . If a small minority of people end up without coverage for whatever reason , their needs can be easily addressed . This could take place with a government safety net , an innovation by private companies , or some combination of the above . Either way , everyone will be able to have some form of coverage so that the cost of getting medical attention could be kept affordable . Beyond making sure that healthcare products and services are safe and secure , I cant see why government invention would be needed at all to make this system work . Next point : nobody is entitled to medical insurance . Frankly , nobody is entitled to anything . A government should not be in the business of providing the stuff to which we think we are entitled . The whole notion of government taking care of you from cradle-to-grave is horribly misguided . A gargantuan state and federal bureaucracy can in no way give each and every man , woman and child the treatment they deserve every day of their life . Last point : giving this gargantuan bureaucracy the legal power to force you to do business with it is a travesty of justice . We have made a horrible mistake by giving the federal government the right to tax or penalize us when purchasing health insurance . We have let it get much too cozy with the corporate providers of healthcare . Who exactly is benefiting by this illicit partnership ? Is it you ? Is it me ? Do we actually have the health insurance we need at a price we can afford ? Many Americans do not . So the answer to your question is yes , the United States government can force you to buy health insurance , and we have nobody to blame but ourselves for this sorry state of affairs .
I am answering this question as a consumer , and as someone who is concerned about the state of our country . I sell life insurance for a living , but am very familiar with how the health insurance marketplace works . I think that everybody does need health insurance , but that everybody shouldnt need health insurance . At least not the way we provide it these days . In our current healthcare delivery system , the cost of services is extremely high . Too high , in many cases . There are probably a variety of reasons for this : greed ; cost inefficiencies ; a litigious legal environment ; burdensome government compliance ; etc. . This is not to say that we do not deliver superior services . People from the world over come here to get the best of care . But we pay an arm and a leg for it , and we shouldnt have to . This has made medical insurance the lesser of two evils . Better to have expensive coverage to minimize your out-of-pocket costs , than to go bankrupt or kill your credit record with huge outstanding debt . Or to have too many people exploit the willingness of healthcare providers to provide free service to the needy , and force the rest of us to subsidize their care . But the price of that coverage is often ridiculously high . And too often , we pay for benefits that we never will need . In the best of all worlds , we would optimize the risk-sharing between the individual consumer and the system . Benefit plans would be tailor-made to the greatest extent possible . Young , healthy guys should be able to buy bare-bones catastrophic coverage . Women of childbearing age could have more comprehensive coverage . And on and on . The last thing you want is for politics to dictate benefits according to the agenda of special interest interest groups . One size does not fit all , and it makes the vast majority of us overpay for services we will never use . This is why I am a huge supporter of alternative self-insurance organizations and healing centers . Health insurance is not one of the basic needs of life , contrary to what many politicians will tell you .
That is a great question ! Many colleges require a minimum amount of health requirements , especially when it comes to immunizations . We are required by the Federal Government to have health insurance coverage , and because so many people do n't have coverage , yes , many colleges do require it . The last number I saw was approximately 35-40 % of Colleges require health insurance coverage -LRB- ACHA 2008 study , if I remember correctly - I have kids in college -RRB- . That number may be higher by now . Having the requirement allows the school to lower their liability , and helps protect the student body . If you need insurance , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thank you for asking !
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
We have life insurance because we love . If there is anyone that would suffer at your passing , life insurance could ease the pain and assist in the transition . We need life insurance because we borrow money . Lenders often ask customers to assign life insurance benefits to secure a loan . We need life insurance if we want to leave a lasting impression on society . If there is a charity that excites you , a gift at your passing might be a significant boost to their activities . If you dont love anyone , dont owe anything and could care less about society , you are probably not a candidate for life insurance .
The answer to the question in most cases is yes . As we get older we get closer to death , it is a fact of life . When we die , someone will have to pay our final expenses and any debts we may incur . We may wish to provide for those we love and help relieve the burden of loss . Life insurance provides that and more .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
Good question but think about it we need to ask ourselves a few questions before we go cheap sometimes cheap is good we all need to be good stewards of our money so the questions we should ask if answered honestly will be an indicator . Do I eat good healthy food ? Do I drink alcohol ? Do I work out at least 20 minutes 2 times a week ? How is my spiritual life ? Then we can decide which policy fits my need it can be fairly cheap but you must answer the questions and have a good consultant that cares about you not the money the money will come when we serve the people .
The health insurance marketplaces -LRB- exchanges as they were originally referred to -RRB- are a creation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and the first exchange based plans were effective on January 1 , 2014 . The marketplaces are set up under either direct state supervision or are managed by the Federal government is the vast majority of states . Their purpose is to provide a web site based means for people to comparison shop between health insurance plan options , determine if they qualify for any premium subsidies and/or cost sharing reductions , and enroll in a health insurance plan . The stated objective of the health insurance marketplaces was to get more people covered under health insurance , enhance competition and to lower health insurance costs while improving overall coverage levels . While we have seen some reduction in the numbers of uninsured Americans we have also seen a shift in coverage from middle class to lower income Americans . It is debatable as to whether the competitive landscape has changed significantly and the general perception is that most people 's benefit levels have decreased while their net costs have increased . The main reason a consumer would want to make use of the government health insurance marketplace would be if they are in the income range -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- where they would qualify for subsidies of their health insurance premiums . A person can only receive premium subsidies for approved health insurance plans purchased through the marketplace in your state . Even in this case , you should seek out the guidance of an experienced health insurance agent to explain the products you are considering purchasing .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Loss Of Belongings Due To Bed Bugs ?
A homeowners policy is designed to pay for damages to your residence . The list of perils that the company insures against is lengthy but insects are specifically excluded in most policies . Eradication of bed bugs is not a covered loss under the policy . It is certainly a condition that should be corrected .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
A homeowners insurance policy will not typically cover for a claim cause by bed bugs . Bed bugs would be considered a vermin which is normally excluded from coverage within a homeowners policy . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that may be contained within .
The nature of a renters policy is to compensate you for damages that you suffer . An infestation of bed bugs might not meet the criteria of damages . The policy pays these damages for specified perils and insect infestation is either excluded or not included in the list of most policies . The renters policy is not designed to address routine maintenance issues .
Renters Insurance does not cover bed bugs . Insects and vermin are a common exclusion on all property policies . This situation would call for an exterminator . If you are unsure and have additional questions I always recommend you contact your local independent agent who can assist you with these type of questions and more . Also an independent agent can help find you the right policy for your needs .
Bed bugs are considered a vermin . Typically all homeowners and renters insurance policies do not cover vermin along with other specified exclusions . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusion that it may contain or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
A homeowners policy is designed to pay for damages to your residence . The list of perils that the company insures against is lengthy but insects are specifically excluded in most policies . Eradication of bed bugs is not a covered loss under the policy . It is certainly a condition that should be corrected .
I ca n't specifically speak for Geico because I do n't represent them and I have n't read their policies . I can however , speak from 22 years in this business as both a captive and an independent agent with many years of advanced education . There are usually two coverage forms that are used in renters policies , Broad Form and Special Form . Broad Form lists which perils you 're property is insured against and insects are not one of them . Special Form covers everything except what 's excluded and insects are excluded so , in general , no , bed bugs would not be covered . The fact that this question had to be posed here is testament to why you need a good agent . A good agent would be able to answer such a question and , if he/she could n't , they could find out and would get back to you quickly . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . Even if they cost a little more , they 'll save you big dollars in the long run .
The key to understanding Homeowners coverage is the word damage . While an insect infestation is messy and expensive it rarely results in damage . The language in your homeowners policy probably excludes damage caused by insects . There is a provision for unsuspected termite damage but rarely anything for bed bugs .
Things like bed bugs and other insects -LRB- under the designation of vermin -RRB- are typically excluded from coverage under renters and homeowners policies . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
Infections acquired during a hospital stay are a growing problem . Due to the sterile environment , only the strongest `` bugs '' -LRB- viruses and bacteria -RRB- can survive . Hospital infections are considered just like any other illness and will be covered by Medicare . With that in mind , hospitals may not bill Medicare if they readily admit their liability .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters or homeowners insurance will not cover bug infestation of any kind or damage caused by insects . Any damage or infestation caused by insects , rodents and vermin are excluded from property polices . If you have a specific scenero I always recommend you discuss the details with your local insurance agent .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
No , that is generally not a covered peril . A homeowners policy would not cover any type of extermination , bats , bugs rats or otherwise . A homeowners policy is designed to cover natural perils such as fire , wind , hail etc. . Some homeowners policy will cover a broad range of perils but usually things like bats would be excluded . Check with your agent and make sure .
In addition to personal property that you own , a homeowners policy covers property that is in your care custody and control . If you have borrowed a bed from a parent and it is damaged due to a named peril -LRB- i.e. fire -RRB- the insurer will either give you the current value of the bed or the replacement value of the bed depending on the coverage that you selected . This money would be given to you minus the deductible .
you can expect the unexpected to hit Renters just the same as home owners . Both for example would have an exposure to fire and it may mean that the renter is more exposed to fire than a homeowner . With a renter you have no real way of knowing that the guy who lives below you smokes while going to sleep , but you are exposed to that . Additionally you liability issues that actually may be greater than a single family insured customer because of something in your lifestyle that makes you more likely to be a danger to your neighbor > Back in the 1970 's it was not uncommon to see young people using water beds . But you can imagine the problems that might ensue form a water bed falling apart in the way of creating a liability to the neighbor who lives below you . Many apartment management companies have therefore have gone to requiring some level of protection you offer them with your renters policy .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Medicare PQRI Program ?
The Medicare PQRI -LRB- Physician Quality Reporting Initiative -RRB- is now called the Medicare PQRS -LRB- Physician Quality Reporting System -RRB- . It is an incentive program that encourages eligible professionals to report data on quality measures for services provided to Medicare Part B Fee-for-Service -LRB- FFS -RRB- beneficiaries . The incentive is a percentage of the Part B charges .
The Medicare PQRI -LRB- Physician Quality Reporting Initiative -RRB- is now called the Medicare PQRS -LRB- Physician Quality Reporting System -RRB- . It is an incentive program that encourages eligible professionals to report data on quality measures for services provided to Medicare Part B Fee-for-Service -LRB- FFS -RRB- beneficiaries . The incentive is a percentage of the Part B charges .
Where in the world did the questioner get this idea ? Any cursory check of the historical voting record of Republicans in Congress will demonstrate that they have been very supportive of this program . Let 's see , who came up with the Medicare Part D prescription drug program ? Oh , yes , President George Bush , not exactly known for being a Democratic party member now was he ? What many Republicans have been pointing out and trying to address is the fact that the Medicare program as it is currently constituted is financially unsustainable and that changes are needed to assure the program is there for the wave of retirees who will be moving onto Medicare in the years ahead . It is the democrat party that responds to any attempts to address the problem withhysteria and demagoguery -LRB- the commercial of a Paul Ryan look alike pushing an elderly lady in a wheel chair over a cliff is a recent example -RRB- . The questioner should also be aware that ObamaCare will transfer $ 700 billion over the next decadein what would have been increased spending for Medicare to help fund the Affordable Care Act 's provisions for those under age 65 . Perhaps you should ask why are the democrats wanting to harm Medicare ?
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services -LRB- also known as CMS -RRB- is a US Department of Health & Human Service agency . They are responsible for running several federal health care programs with Medicare and Medicaid being the 2 main programs . Medicare is a federal health insurance program that you are eligible for at age 65 or if you qualify from a disability . Medicaid is a federal and state run program . It provides health care services for certain individuals who qualify based on their income .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicaid is a state run program for poor or low income individuals , & Medicare is a Federal program . Part B premiums are deducted from your Social Security generally . Some individuals that have not worked 40 quarters or more during their working careers , may have an additional cost for Medicare . The Medicare program part `` A '' is for Hospitalization , part `` B '' , is for doctor visits , part `` C '' is Medicare Advantage , & part `` D '' is prescription drug coverage .
There are many companies that offer universal life insurance , however , the products can vary substantially between carriers . The first thing you want to find out is which products are guaranteed universal life programs , meaning even if the cash value hit $ 0 , the policy will still pay a death benefit as long as you keep paying your premiums . Current assumption -LRB- non-guaranteed -RRB- universal life programs can seem great on paper , but carry a lot of risk - if the cash value hits $ 0 under these programs , then the policy crashes and you 're left with no benefits . You would subsequently have to keep paying more and more into the policy at higher amounts to keep it going . When comparing the plans from each carrier , you want to look at what risk class you qualify for -LRB- this determines the premiums - not every carrier is going to offer the same risk class for a given medical profile -RRB- , the cost of insurance under the plan , the interest rates -LRB- guaranteed vs. current -RRB- , and the cash value build in the policy . Work with an independent life insurance agent/broker so you can compare quotes from multiple carriers and review the benefits under each program available in the marketplace with someone who has the knowledge of how the programs work and which one will offer you the most favorable benefit structure . If you 'd like my assistance or have any questions , send me a message using the `` contact me '' button .
In the vast majority of situations the answer is no . Medicaid is a state-run insurance program designed to help low income persons pay for their health care . As a general rule you must not be able to afford to pay for private health insurance in order to qualify for Medicaid . However , this is a government program we 're talking about so there are always some exceptions buried in the fine print . This is where things can get complicated and the rules can vary from state to state in some situations . Some state Medicaid programs will assist in paying private insurance premiums for a person who can not fully pay them . A low income person who has recently lost their job and their health insurance through their former job may be eligible for assistance in paying their COBRA premiums in some states . You would have to check with your state 's Medicaid office to learn what the rules are in your particular state . Also , you have a limited amount of time to apply for such assistance after losing your job in states that provide this type of assistance so time is of the essence . Medicaid also has a special program for people diagnosed with AIDS that may qualify them for premium payment assistance . Once again , you will need to check with your state 's Medicaid office to determine what their policies and procedures are for qualifying for such assistance .
Medicare is a fee for service program . A doctor or hospital can agree to accept Medicare patients and thus contract with Medicare to accept the rules and conditions imposed by Medicare , or they can opt out of the Medicare program , in which case a medicare patient would be responsible for payment if they go to that doctor or the doctor can simply refuse Medicare patients . The same is true for hospitals or other facilities .
There are several taxpayer funded assistance programs for low income Medicare beneficiaries . If you qualify for Extra Help , your Medicare Part B premium is paid for you under QMB , SLMB , or QI programs . All 3 assistance programs will pay your Medicare Part B premium . Some will also pay your Part A , deductibles and coinsurance .
The two basic types of life insurance plans are term insurance and permanent insurance . Within that , there are different categories of each type . For term insurance , you 've got fully underwritten coverage with exams -LRB- which will generally provide you with the lowest premiums -RRB- and non-medical programs . Non-medical programs generally feature very similar underwriting requirements as fully underwritten programs , but without the requirement of an exam . While a carrier may not request a doctor 's statement for every policy , they reserve the right to order one . For permanent insurance , you have universal life and whole life insurance . Whole life insurance will generally be the most expensive , but provides fixed premiums for life and a consistent build-up of cash value in the policy . Universal life is a flexible program that puts less emphasis on cash value and more on the death benefit . Many people will set up a guaranteed universal life policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- to maximize their death benefit and guarantee the premiums for life . There are other types of life insurance programs out there , but this gives you a brief overview .
CMS , the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services oversees Medicare . It is a federal agency within the United States Department of Health and Human Services -LRB- DHHS -RRB- . CMSadministers the Medicare program and works with states alsoonMedicaid adminstration including children 's programs -LRB- such asState Children 's Health Insurance Program - SCHIP -RRB- . CMS also has a key role in administering HIPAA , and agents also go through CMS for certification of the new Marketplace plans .
There are 3 Medicare programs that can help you pay your Medicare Part B premium . These are termed Medicare Savings Programs and you qualify based on family income . Medicare QMB will pay your Medicare Part A and Part B premiums as well as offer assistance on deductibles and coinsurance . SLMB and QI will pay your Medicare Part B premium only .
The cuts are real , and from what I see , the carriers are working to cut their costs in some creative ways . This can be a benefit for those among us that have neglected their health and fitness , or just need a little boost . For instance , fitness programs can now be an included benefit in Medicare Advantage Plans . Some carriers are giving gift cards to get your screenings done . Smoking and obesity education are often available . Yes , a more fit population lowers the cost for the carrier , but so what ! Why not take advantage of their programs , take some initiative and get some healthier life choices . Life is not a dress rehearsal , so make the most of your life by being as healthy as your age and abilities allow . Check out these new benefits , or call your agent to find out what supplemental programs are offered by your carrier . The cuts are not going away , so the healthier you are , the less you will feel the financial pinch of those cuts . Like your mom said , `` eat your vegetables ! ''
Medicare is a Federal program available to all persons age 65 and over or who are on Social Security Disability who have paid into the program while working . It provides Medical Coverage . Medicaid is a program designed for people with low assets and income . You must qualify in these two area 's to receive Medicaid . It is designed to pay for things like Long Term Care , and Medicare Deductibles and copay 's . It can also help pay for other items not normally covered by Medicare .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What is the difference between Medicare and Medicaid ? Medicare is the health program that most Americans enter into at age 65 or later . It is a basic health plan that most people purchase additional coverage through a Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage program . Medicaid is our social safety net used to provide a base level of health insurance coverage to the poor and disadvantaged .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Adjustable Beds ?
Does health insurance cover adjustable beds ? If it is medically necessary and you can obtain a physician 's statement that it is needed for medical reasons , it may be possible to have it covered . Otherwise , based on my 32 years of experience , typically it is not covered on individual health insurance plans prior to 2014 .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed under `` durable medical equipment '' . If you need an adjustable bed please discuss this with your doctor and alert them that you are going to purchase a bed and the company selling the bed will bill medicare so you can ask the doctor if he will certify it as being medically necessary
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
Does health insurance cover adjustable beds ? If it is medically necessary and you can obtain a physician 's statement that it is needed for medical reasons , it may be possible to have it covered . Otherwise , based on my 32 years of experience , typically it is not covered on individual health insurance plans prior to 2014 .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
Hospital beds are considered durable medical goods and are covered under Medicare Part B . If you can prove that the hospital bed is medically necessary and you have Medicare Part B then the cost of the hospital bed will be covered under medicare .
Health insurance is intended to pay for items that are medically necessary . No matter how much better a new mattress may be for any medical condition one may have , you would be hard pressed to find a physician that is going to prescribe a new bed and deem it medically necessary . And , even if you found a doctor to write such a prescription , you are going to have a very difficult time convincing an insurance company this was an true medical need , as opposed to something to help you sleep better . If you are covered by Medicare , and prescribe a hospital bed , that is covered under Medicare Part B as durable medical equipment , with you being responsible for buying 20 % of the Medicare-approved cost of a hosptial bed after your deductible has been met .
In addition to personal property that you own , a homeowners policy covers property that is in your care custody and control . If you have borrowed a bed from a parent and it is damaged due to a named peril -LRB- i.e. fire -RRB- the insurer will either give you the current value of the bed or the replacement value of the bed depending on the coverage that you selected . This money would be given to you minus the deductible .
Medicare has specific fees for DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including wheel chairs , walkers and hospital beds . DME supplies are covered under Medicare Part B . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier and make sure they accept assignment . The hospital bed requires a doctors prescription . Your DME supplier can give you an idea of how much Medicare will pay toward the cost of renting a bed .
In some situations you may qualify for special beds and or mattresses . If you are completely immobile , or have a tendency towards bed sores , Medicare Part B may authorize payment for a special bed or mattress . Best to ask your doctor for advice on this matter . Be sure to use a Medicare approved DME provider and one that accepts assignment .
A homeowners insurance policy will not typically cover for a claim cause by bed bugs . Bed bugs would be considered a vermin which is normally excluded from coverage within a homeowners policy . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that may be contained within .
First please note that the bed must be prescribed by your physician as medically necessary . Once the bed has been received , my research shows that Medicare will only cover replacement equipment if your doctor writes you a new order or prescription with an explanation of the medical need .
Medicare will pay for an in home hospital bed that has been ordered by a doctor and approved by Medicare . You generally have the option to rent or purchase the bed under Medicare part B . The regular deductible and 20 % copay apply , although a medical supplement plan can sometimes offset these costs .
A Medicare swing bed is used when a patient still needs rehabilitation or skilled nursing services after a consecutive stay in an acute care hospital of at least 3 days . Medicare will pay for this stay up to 20 days in full and up to 100 days with a copay . Swing beds are located in Medicare approved small rural hospitals that offer both acute care and skilled nursing or rehabilitative care , and in Medicare approved skilled nursing facilities .
Some of the items and services that Medicare does n't cover include : < a title = '' Services that include medical and non-medical care provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living , like dressing or bathing . Long-term supports and services can be provided at home , in the community , in assisted living , or in nursing homes . Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age . Medicare and most health insurance plans do n't pay for long-term care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > Long-term care -LRB- also called < a title = '' Non-skilled personal care , like help with activities of daily living like bathing , dressing , eating , getting in or out of a bed or chair , moving around , and using the bathroom . It may also include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves , like using eye drops . In most cases , Medicare does n't pay for custodial care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > custodial care -RRB- Most dental care Eye examinations related to prescribing glasses Dentures Cosmetic surgery Acupuncture Hearing aids and exams for fitting them Routine foot care You can go to the medicare.gov website and check on the main page if any test , item or service is covered by Medicare .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
you can expect the unexpected to hit Renters just the same as home owners . Both for example would have an exposure to fire and it may mean that the renter is more exposed to fire than a homeowner . With a renter you have no real way of knowing that the guy who lives below you smokes while going to sleep , but you are exposed to that . Additionally you liability issues that actually may be greater than a single family insured customer because of something in your lifestyle that makes you more likely to be a danger to your neighbor > Back in the 1970 's it was not uncommon to see young people using water beds . But you can imagine the problems that might ensue form a water bed falling apart in the way of creating a liability to the neighbor who lives below you . Many apartment management companies have therefore have gone to requiring some level of protection you offer them with your renters policy .
Medicare does cover Durable Medical Equipment , however , exercise equipment would most likely not be covered . DME is most often things like wheelchairs , hospital beds , oxygen equipment , nebulizers and the like . In most cases , Medicare will pay 80 % and you would be responsible for 20 % . Depending on the plan you choose , the 20 % would be covered by your Medigap policy . To find out for sure , call 1-800-MEDICARE .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for incontinence supplies such as adult diapers and bed pads . If the insured person is in a hospital or skilled nursing facility , those items will be covered under Medicare Part A.Otherwise , Part B will not cover them due them not being classified as durable medical equipment .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Long Should You Carry Disability Insurance ?
You should carry Disability Insurance as long as having your income is crucial to your family and financial goals . The chances of becoming disabled actually increase , the older you get . So the chances of your using your DI increase as you age . Again , if your income is no longer needed , you may no longer need to carry Disability Insurance . For most of us , that point does not come until we retire .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
AARP recently discontinued carrying Long Term Care Insurance . The American Association of Retired Persons still offers advice on how to purchase LTC insurance and may start carrying it again in the future . To obtain Long Term Care Insurance quotes elsewhere you can contact a local agency or search for brokers for Long Term Care Insurance on the internet who will shop several companies for you .
The simple answer to this question is the driver who is determined to be liable for the accident is required to pay for damages , regardless if they have insurance or not . If they do carry insurance , then their policy will pay . If they do n't carry insurance , and your policy includes Uninsured Motorist coverage , then your policyshould pay for damage to your vehicle , minus any deductibles , and your insurance company will determine if they want to go after the liable party to recover their losses . If you were determined to be liable in this situation , then your insurance would be primary since the owner of the vehicle did not carry insurance . Even though the other driver was determined to be at fault , you could have your insurance company handle the claim and they will go after the other driver 's insurance company to recover anything they pay on your claim . Your car should be covered , regardless of who is at fault in this accident , since you stated thatboth drivers carried insurance .
You can get Disability Insurance from websites like ours , that shop it for you from several companies . Or you can contact a local life insurance agent . Disability Insurance is carried by companies that usually also carry Life Insurance . But make sure that you are talking with someone who thoroughly understands Disability Insurance so that you will get the features in your policy that accomplish what you desire .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Long Term Disability Insurance is needed for anyone whose income is essential to maintaining their home , business , or standard of living . Workers may have enough savings to carry them through a few months to years of being disabled , but there are usually also medical expenses involved that can rapidly deplete savings and investments . The chances of a woman being disabled at some point before retirement age are 1 on 3 , and the chances of a man being disabled at some point before retirement are 1 in 4 . So Long Term Disability Insurance is a valid need and more common than most people realize .
Unlike auto insurance Homeowners insurance is not required by any law . However , that does n't mean that you 're not required to carry it . I know that sounds contradictory , but there 's a significant distinction . Even though you 're not required by law to carry it , you may be required by contract , namely a mortgage , to carry at least a minimum of coverage . When you purchase a home with a mortgage , the mortgage company will require you to carry coverage that will repair or rebuild your home to certain standards . The mortgage company is simply protecting the asset you 're using as collateral for the loan . If you own your home outright , you not required to insure it at all . Why someone would n't protect their biggest asset is a mystery to me , but it could happen . Be smart . find an agent you can trust . He/she will be able to help you get the coverage you need at a price you can afford .
The business can pay for short or long term disability insurance in a employer sponsored group plan . But some corporations do n't carry long term disability in their group plans , so they offer long term disability to their key executives as an extra retention benefit . They may be able to deduct the premiums , however if they do the benefits may be taxable .
No , actually these are two different types of insurance policies that cover two totally different events . Long term care insurance covers an individual in the event that they can no longer care for themselves . LTC pays for home health care , assisted living and nursing home care usually as a person ages . These policies should be considered in your late 50s or early 60s . Long term disability is an insurance policy that replaces earned income over a long period of time such as 10 , 20 , 30 years or age 65 or 67 years old . These policies should be purchased when the person goes to work for a living and carried until retirement age .
Many leases will require you to carry 100/300 liability limits so if for some reason you want to carry lower limits you will see a premium difference there . Other then that the premiums are no different then if you owned the car yourself . If you are in a position to lease a car you should be carrying a minimum of 100/300 liability limits anyway .
How much should you invest in annuities ? The answer is an individual one based on your concerns about RISK and RETURN . There is n't a formula or set amount that people should follow . Annuities and equities and other places to park money should be divided up based on your risk profile as different investment choices carry different levels of risk . Risk simply means at what point do you stop putting money in places where the return can be zero or your money could be lost ? Everybody is different , annuities for the most part tend to be low risk products . Should you have money there ? I think so , I would , but my understanding of risk and how it effects things may be different than yours .
Long term disability insurance is an income replacement in case of a debilitating illness or injury causing you to no longer be able to carry out your duties in your current occupation . A long term disability plan will pay up to 70 % of your current income during the disability period . You may use the money as you see fit . The `` long term '' phrase has to deal with the length of time you will receive benefits . Usually a time period greater than 2 years or until the age of 67 years old depending on the plan you choose .
I suggest a number of different approaches . How much coverage would you want the person to carry if they injured you or your family or damaged your property in a car accident ? If you cause an accident , injure family members riding with you and are from a state permitting intra-family suits , how much coverage would you want available to pay for their injuries ? And of course , how much do you stand to lose ? What is your net worth , the value of your earning power , and/or the value of your personal integrity ? None of these methods will lead you to the perfect limit but they are the considerations I would suggest one think about when selecting the appropriate amount of insurance . In addition , I always suggest your uninsured/under-insured motorists coverage -LRB- the one that covers you , your family and possibly the passengers in your car in case the other car is not insured or poorly insured -RRB- be consistent with the coverage you carry in case you hurt someone else . However if none of these considerations apply , one must always be aware of the minimum limits required by most state laws .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Car Insurance Cover Locking Your Keys In Your Car ?
There could be coverage for locking keys in your car if you carry roadside assistance or towing on your auto policy . Otherwise locking keys in the car is not a peril of an auto policy . Check with your local agent to see if you carry roadside coverage on your auto policy . Also if you do not have the coverage a good local agent may find you a reputable company who can come out and unlock your car at a reasonable rate .
There could be coverage for locking keys in your car if you carry roadside assistance or towing on your auto policy . Otherwise locking keys in the car is not a peril of an auto policy . Check with your local agent to see if you carry roadside coverage on your auto policy . Also if you do not have the coverage a good local agent may find you a reputable company who can come out and unlock your car at a reasonable rate .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
If you lost your keys , you 're probably out of luck since most insurers do n't pay for replacement keys in that situation . However , if your locks were damaged during a theft or break-in , or the keys were stolen , many homeowner 's policies will pay for their replacement . It 's possible a deductible may not apply since it clearly is in your and the insurance company 's best interest to replace your locks . An experienced broker will shed additional light and information on this topic .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Insurance follows the car . If you are involved in an accident the insurance on that car will be the primary coverage for a claim . Your policy may provide secondary coverage if the claims exceeds the limits of the policy covering the car . If you are driving a car that is rented you will be covered to the limits of your policy . The key is that the insurance is on the car not you , the driver . Make sure that the car is insured first .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
In Canada , variable annuities are often referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but since they are issued by insurance companies that have certain maturity and death benefits guarantees . Some even include locking in or resetting of the guarantees to `` lock in '' market gain . The insurance company does provide some guarantees , however , any amount that is allocated to a segregated fund is invested at the risk of the policy owner and may increase or decrease in value . A description of the key features of the segregated fund policy issued by the insurance company is contained in the information folder . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
OK , this will be a quick run down of coverages most commonly needed but the answer may vary some form state to state : The first coverage you need is Bodily Injury Liability . This is the amount of coverage you need to protect yourself from the claims and law suits of people you injure . The second but related coverage is the Property damage coverage for property you destroy . So it is common in the US to sell them in groups such as 100/300/100 . Now what does that mean : The first number is critical . This is the per person limit of bodily injury liability . Insurers are not stupid . They know that in 75 % of all accidents , there will be one person in each vehicle -LRB- it is just the way Americans drive -RRB- So , there is a lot less likelihood of hitting that 300,000 but it would take injury to more than one person to do it . So the odds are with your insurer . Another way to buy insurance -LRB- usually about 10 % more in cost -RRB- is through Combined Single Limits coverage , CSL gives you one bulk sum to pay the claim more as the accident happened rather than based on the sub limits of your policy . So split limits are the norm , but for a little more you might want combined single limit coverage . The next coverage is usually PIP or Medical Payments . Both of these sort of compensate for usually minor events for which the party is injured and you want to take care of the injury regardless of fault . For example you give a ride to a friend who slams the door on his finger . Yes it was his fault , but it was your car and you do n't want suing you over this . Your policy responds with either medical payment or Personal Injury . PIP is usually broader and often includes wages loss which Med Pay does not . The next group of coverages are usually the most important on your policy . These are your uninsured or under-insured motorist coverage . In about 14 % of accidents the at fault party will have no insurance . And in the next grouping of the accidents you will see coverage of the at fault party at state minimums or not much more . . Now you need the protection of UM coverage . A good rule of thumb is never buy less UM than you have for Bodily Injury Liability . This is now you protecting yourself , your family and passengers in your car . It is perhaps the most little understood coverage and most important part of your policy.Lastly as respects UM/UIM you need Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Property Damage at a level commensurate with the ACV of you car . Next come the coverages on the physical damage to your car . The coverages are Comprehensive or also called OTC or Other than Collision . which covers many perils such as theft , fire , flood , trees falling on the vehicle etc. . Collision occurs when you hit something such as a tree , a road curb , a pothole , another vehicle etc. . This is where the value of your car is a consideration . You should also select a deductible that is right for you and your household budget From here we go to many ancillary coverages including Rental Reimbursement which is usually stated as a dollar limit for thirty days -LRB- enough time usually to get your car repaired -RRB- > The coverage is triggered by another cause of loss such as collision . The next and perhaps last coverage to consider for the general public is towing or as some companies offer road side assistance . Towing is just that towing . Whereas roadside service is usually sign and drive towing , run out of gas , lock out of car etc. . Now if you have a new car you might want replacement coverage or if leased gap coverage for loan or lease . If you do n't understand any of this gives us a call , We believe an educated consumer is better for every one .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
In Canada , variable annuities are referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but there are differences . Which one is better depends on your objectives . Both offer diversified investment opportunities to build wealth . In addition , segregated fund policies provide important wealth protection , business and estate planning solutions . The key differences : Guarantees on your principal - The money you invest in a seg fund is guaranteed up to 100 % upon death or maturity . Locking-in market gains - Some seg funds allow you to lock in market gains -LRB- `` resets '' -RRB- that can increase the amount payable at death or maturity . Bypass probate - Seg fund death benefit proceeds are paid directly to a named beneficiary instead of your estate . This bypasses probate , a public process that can be both costly and lengthy . Creditor protection - By designating a qualified beneficiary on your seg fund policy , your investments maybe exempt from seizure by creditors in the event of unforeseen bankruptcy or legal proceedings . Segregated funds are well suited to : Business owners looking for creditor protection succession planning or emergency fund solution . Pre-retirees looking for wealth accumulation but want to limit potential losses with maturity and death guarantees . Pre-retirees and retirees looking to preserve their legacy and transfer their estate in the most private , timely and cost-effective way . If you have further questions . or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is addition information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
That actually depends upon the terms and conditions of your policy so it would be a good idea to talk to your insurance professional about this . Unless there are specific limitations , with standard auto policies , you may find that the coverage applies to you and your car as well as to you and any other car you may be lawfully driving while it temporarily replaces your car . There are a couple of key things to remember if that is the case . First , only the coverage you have will apply so if you do n't have collision on your policy , it wo n't apply to any other car you are driving . Second , the coverage extension may also only apply to the use of other private passenger cars so it wo n't apply to that Uhaul truck you are planning on renting for the day .
Many insurance companies will allow you to buy back a vehicle which they have declared to be a total loss . The key is to let the insurance company know immediately that you want to retain the car regardless of their decision on repairs . Once the car has been determined to be totaled it will be sent to a salvage yard and off to auction or dismantle . Once it is in that system it is difficult to retrieve the car , so let the insurance company know immediately that you want to keep the car . The insurance company will then adjust the settlement to include the value of the car in its current condition .
In most states you are required to be financially responsible in order to operate a car on the public roads . Being financially responsible means own auto insurance on the car for most people . It is possible to purchase a car and never drive it , some collectors do that . So the key is not in buying a car but in operating it . Dont forget that in most states the registered owner is the one who will be held responsible for anything that happens . To protect themselves auto dealers frequently require evidence of insurance before allowing the car to leave the sales lot .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Pet Injury ?
Homeowners policies routinely exclude coverage on animals , birds , fish or insects . There are companies that provide insurance for animals . Some automobile insurers will provide coverage for an animal injured in an auto accident .
It is fair to say that about fifty-percent of all renters own one or more pets . So it is very common for renters policies to be issued to pet owners . These pets are not limited to dogs and cats , of course . The biggest issue is the type of animal and breed . Some are on insurance carriers ' excluded pets lists . Rather than have an effect on the rate charged , more often than not the carrier will refuse to write the policy if one of the excluded animals is involved . The key issue is injury liability to others , caused by bites . Renters insurance will protect if a lawsuit is brought , as a result of someone elses injury , including those caused by pets , up to the policy limits for both physical injury and property damage of others .
If you have an Ho-3 policy without an exclusion for viscous animals and your animal -LRB- likely a dog -RRB- does not have a prior bite history the policy will likely respond should your pet bite someone and cause bodily injury . Some policies have specific exclusions for specific breeds . Make sure you read the endorsement carefully and check with your local independent insurance agent before filing a claim . I have not heard of insurance policy covering a `` pet '' for replacement ... meaning if your pet dies or gets injured they will not repair or replace the pet-like they would a couch or other personal property . Hope this answer helps .
Renter 's Insurance normally includes Liability Insurance coverage , which would pay for acts of a pet . There are some policies with sub-limits for acts of pets -LRB- means they pay less than your regular liability limit if a pet causes someone to sue you -RRB- , and some with exclusions for acts of pets , so it really depends on your policy . Keep in mind that if your dog bites someone , your insurance will normally cancel the policy if you keep the pet as they believe that a dog who has bitten before will likely bite again . I do n't necessarily agree with that logic but I have seen a lot of families have to put a pet to sleep because it has bitten someone - either due to insurance requirements or law enforcement requirements .
Most insurance companies do n't offer life insurance for pets nor do most agents have it as a type of coverage they offer . Pet insurance does not pay out proceeds like a traditional life insurance policy . It typically covers veterinary fees , pet health conditions , damage to someone 's property -LRB- caused by the pet -RRB- , and/or pet funeral needs . I would recommend consulting with your veterinarian and see if they can refer you to an agent that offers this type of coverage .
Pet Health Insurance is a good idea if you are willing to go to extreme measures to treat your pet , or save its life . Consumer Reports in Sept of 2011 concluded that pet insurance is not necessary for those who are willing to set aside some money each month for their pets ' medical needs . However , other agencies concluded that it is necessary due to the high cost of treating pets and managing their pain . Again , if you are willing to provide dialysis , transplants , diabetes shots , and the like to extend the life of your pet , pet insurance can pay off .
Mark has given you a factual answer but let me give you a personal answer . A renters policy costs less than the loss you might suffer should your property be damaged as a result of a covered loss -LRB- fire , wind etc. -RRB- Insurance isnt a tax but sharing of a risk . Unless you can buy everything in your unit today out of your checking account , having a renters policy makes great sense . The real reason to have a renters policy is to defend you should you be sued for bodily injury or property damage . Anyone entering the property could sue you if they slip and fall or your pet decides to taste their leg . These are really serious issues and the expense can be enormous . Few of us can sustain that type of claim . While Mark mentioned a $ 100,000 liability limit , let me suggest that you take the highest limit that your insurance company offers . Let them take the risk , the premium is insignificant in comparison to the risk .
If you have Homeowners or Renters Insurance owning a pet could be difficult . Depending on the company they will not insured you or cancel the policy the minute you do not disclose the pet . Now regarding damage . Pet damage to your own or other persons property generally wont be covered by insurance companies . The typical policy wont cover dwelling , other structures or content when the loss is caused by an animal under the care of the policy holder.I would contact your company and ask if they provide this coverage . If you are looking for another company make sure you ask also as they may give you the same answer . Thank you and good luck .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
As with most insurance questions , the answer includes read your specific policy . There are different policy forms which include different `` levels '' of coverage for both the home itself and the property inside . Basic and Broad form policies only cover you against a specific list of perils . Pet damage is not on this list . Special form policies , however , typically cover the home against any perils not specifically excluded . Most carriers do not exclude pet damage and therefore it would be covered . Unless specifically endorsed , the property inside the home may still be covered under the broad form list of perils even if the home is covered by special form . This leads to a scenario where the home would be covered for pet damage but the property inside would not . As always , the loss would be subject to your deductible so only losses exceeding that amount would be paid .
There are several parts to a general Renters ' policy : 1 . Personal Property : This coverage will cover your personal belongings that are destroyed in a covered event . Each policy is different but the general events are theft , fire , smoke , water damage , wind , hail , and tornadic . You can either choose to cover your personal belongings at Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- or Replacement Cost . Some companies require a minimum amount of coverage to qualify for Replacement Cost . 2 . Personal Liability : Gives you andd your family 24/7 coverage against claims caused by almost any unintentional act . Medical costs for persons injured on your premises , who do not reside within your household . The liability coverage generally covers you whether on or off the premises . Be sure to check with your insurance carrier to verify . This coverage also covers the acts of your pets as long as you list the pets on the policy . 3 . Additional Living Expenses : If you ca n't live in your home after a covered loss , most carriers provide this coverage to cover the additional costs of living , meals , nhotels , etc. . You have the option to add other coverages such as Jewelry Floaters , etc. for an additional premium .
There are several ways that you can purchase a renters policy . If you search the internet you will find some websites that will actually quote and issue a renters policy . The problem you face with this approach is that a policy is selected to pay your damages when you suffer a loss may be inadequate . It is quite likely that when you actually suffer that loss you will find that you are not sufficiently insured . Then the insurance policy you have been paying on becomes the most expensive policy that you could have purchased because it wont cover your loss . The better approach is to engage an insurance agent . You may not know an agent . Get recommendations from your neighbors , friends and colleagues . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . You really want everyone to be on the same page at the time of a loss . The agent will probably start by asking you the value of your personal property . To prepare for that question , I suggest that you take pictures of everything that you own . You can store that valuable record off site in case of a loss . Review the pictures and make an estimate of the cost to replace everything that you own . The sum of those estimates determines the value you need to set on your renters policy . Remember that you are looking at replacement value , not current value . In this process you might have property that is subject to internal limits within the policy . You need to specify the replacement value of any jewelry , guns , computer equipment , and collectibles . There are other classes of property that warrant special attention . Ask the agent about any unusual property that might be in your possession . The next thing that the agent will discuss is the liability limit . Insist on the highest limit that the agent can write . You can never have enough liability insurance . This protects you by providing for your defense and any awards against you up to the limits of the policy . You want these limits to be very high . A lawsuit can ruin your life . If you have a pet make sure that the agent knows about the pet . This is particularly important if you own a dog . Policies often have greatly reduced liability limits for dogs and may exclude all coverage for dogs of certain breeds or with a history of biting . This is a major source of claims . If you have a trampoline on the property makes sure that the agent knows that as well . Often owning a renters policy is a requirement of a lease . In those cases the landlord generally wants to be named as an additional insured . You need to have his or her name and address to provide to the agent . Incidentally , this is a reasonable requirement of the landlord and might be required by his or her insurance company . The final piece of information has to do with any losses that you might have previously suffered either at the unit you are currently renting or another unit . The information should be as detailed as possible to assist in underwriting your application .
Most renters insurance polices will allow you to have most pets . However many will limit you on vicious dogs or exotic pets . Since this can vary by company I recommend you discuss your particular needs with a local agent who can obtain quotes from various companies to find the policy that is right for you .
You would be surprised how many claims there are for little lap dogs biting people . In Florida , many of the carriers that write homeowner 's and renter 's insurance exclude pets completely - no matter the breed . If you have pets , it 's important to discuss that with your agent so that they can place your coverage with a carrier that offers animal liability , if it is available .
I have never heard of pet life insurance , but it is not to say it exists . The few policies of pet insurance I am familiar with all work like health insurance to offset some cost of a veterinarian costs for sick or injured dogs and cats . It is very affordable and vet bills can get expensive . Maybe check with a pet cemetery they may have knowledge of something .
Yes , but you can only buy it from licensed dog agents . :-RRB- Seriously , I can not find any explicit life insurance plan for pets , but I see the some pet health insurance plans have an allowance for pet funerals , burial , and/or cremation . Here is a great website for comparing those plans . WEBSITELINK
Go check out the business insurance offered by PSI-Pet Sitters Int ` l . They offer policies specifically for pet sitters . If their policy allows a minor to purchase it , I would go that route . You may have to purchase it for yourself & list your son as an employee . You may have to be the business owner and ` delegate ' all the pet sittings to him .
Renters insurance would not typically cover for any pet damage . This would typically be considered the renter 's responsibility or the owner of the animal responsibility . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage that is provided and any exclusions that there may be within the policy or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Pet liability is a big issue and generally when the question is asked it pertains to a dog . Most renters insurance willexcludecertain types of dogs if they bit someone . Theseparticulardogs but not limited to are pit bulls , boxers , Akita , rottweilers , chows , and maybe more . It is very important you speak with a local agent on this issue about the breed of dog you own and if your renters insurance would protect you in the event of a dog bite .
Generally the liability coverage offered under a homeowners policy covers the activities of your pets away from the property . The policies generally restrict their coverage considerably for dog bites . You might find a claim denied because of the breed of the dog . This is a very sensitive area and I would urge you to contact your agent immediately if your pet has bitten someone .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Provides The Cheapest Car Insurance ?
Car insurance is regulated by each state 's insurance commissioner . Therefore each company is going to reflect your driving record and how far you drive to work each day and if you use your car in your business and if you have a car that qualifies for discounts due to small engine or if you have the biggest engine and the loudest mufflers in town . Who provides the cheapest car insurance-you do .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
Car insurance is regulated by each state 's insurance commissioner . Therefore each company is going to reflect your driving record and how far you drive to work each day and if you use your car in your business and if you have a car that qualifies for discounts due to small engine or if you have the biggest engine and the loudest mufflers in town . Who provides the cheapest car insurance-you do .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
This is a very complicated subject . In California all the drivers in a household are included on an auto policy . Parents dont want the additional expense of insuring their cars with an inexperienced driver in the household . Some purchase a car and place the car in the 18 year olds name . They then buy the cheapest auto insurance with just the bare legal limits . The problem arises when the inexperienced driver injures others in an accident and the injured party starts suing . The lawyers will not stop at the limits of the policy purchased for the 18 year old . I have seen them even go after grandparents who loaned money to the 18 year old . Your only recourse is the low limit policy purchased for the car . The rest of the lawsuit comes after everything that you own . It is usually cheaper to include the inexperienced driver on the family policy . If you add another car you can isolate the expense to that car but at least you can have the advantages of discounts and perhaps save yourself from bankruptcy down the road .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
As with most everything in life , the best and the cheapest are rarely the same thing and you do tend to get what you pay for . The cheapest health insurance that meets the requirements under ObamaCare will have a very high deductible and have you paying for all health care services -LRB- except preventive care -RRB- out of your pocket until you have met that deductible that may be $ 6000 or more . If you never use any health care during the year then this would meet your criteria for being the cheapest and perhaps the best . The best heath insurance plans that meet the requirements under ObamaCare will provide you with reasonable copayments , a low deductible and relatively low out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure -LRB- maybe as low as several hundred or a thousand dollars -RRB- . However , these plans will have a significantly higher monthly premium . The true answer to your question is unique to each individual . You would be well served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you define your needs and budget and then find the best health insurance plan -LRB- either in the government marketplaces or outside them -RRB- that fits your needs .
`` Cheaper '' in premium or `` cheaper '' in service provided and claims paid ? No one insurance company will always be the `` cheapest '' in premium . If you are looking for the cheapest premium , you best plan on shopping and switching monthly because competitive pricing/positioning is ALWAYS changing . However if you value appropriate coverage for your station in life , do your research on reputable companies , find an insurance professional you trust and stick with him or her . It will average out in the long term . You potentially do yourself a financial disservice at claim time if you elect to go with the cheapest .
Everyone wants to pay less for car insurance butbe careful purchasingthe cheapest policy . Purchasing the cheapest policy onlinemay cost you severly down the road . For example , a home owner in Virginia recentlypurchased a policy online with state minmium limits . The policy was $ 15 less per month so he decided to switch . Two months later he was hit by an uninsured driver and in the hospital for 3 months . The new policy he purchased did not cover his car much less his medical bills . Cheaper is notbetter sowhen it comes to insurance focus on finding the best value .
The cheapest car insurance for young drivers depends on many factors including your age , type of vehicle , driving record and where you live . An experienced broker , along with their website will provide you with the best chance of getting the best rates . That 's our job - Finding the cheapest prices from the most reputable companies .
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
The cheapest auto insurance is the policy that pays the maximum amount when you have a claim . This policy may not have the lowest premium but it protects you . At that moment there will not be any other criteria to judge whether the policy was cheapest or not . You get this kind of insurance from an insurance agent who will listen to you , provide sound financial advice , and communicate clearly with both you and the insurance company .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
You can find the cheapest auto insurance at your agents office . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy with adequate limits that pays damages that result from an accident . Since this can involve personal injury and property damage , the amount can increase rapidly . Your agent will listen to you , offer sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . When you have a claim , you will be happy that you have the cheapest insurancethe one that pays !
The cheapest life insurance policy is the one that you already own . The cheapest life insurance policy you can buy is one that is scheduled to expire the day after you die . The fact is that the cheapest life insurance policy is always the one that is in force on the day that you die . If that is your concern work with a good life insurance agent . The agent can match your needs with a policy that will fit into your budget . Remember that when you save money on the premium and the policy expires before you die ; it is your loved ones that pay the price .
end question
start question
life-insurance
I Need A New Life Policy , Term Just Expired
To determine your next steps , it would be important to know if you are still within 30 days of the term expiry -LRB- policy anniversary date -RRB- . You may be able to change the premium mode from annual to monthly -LRB- if necessary -RRB- and continue the policy month to month at the new higher premium in the term policy until you can get a new policy . Also , does the term policy have a conversion provision and , if so , did it expire ? Usually conversion ends at the end of the initial term period but sometimes it extends to a later age . Most importantly , are you insurable ? If you are not , you need to work with a life insurance professional and the insurer to try to preserve the coverage you have if it is not too late . If you are insurable , find a life insurance professional and apply for coverage - and , as this situation suggests , maybe term is not right for you so plan on buying a permanent policy that can be designed to meet your needs .
Assuming youre past the reinstatement period or , in fact , the term life insurance period of your contract has expired , you could do a quick review of a term life insurance spreadsheet and purchase another policy . If your health is good , you could bind the policy with the required deposit to protect you in the in-between time providing youd pass all the requirements . You could also apply for simplified issue or simplified issue with AD&D to secure basic coverage now and after underwriting convert the AD&D to full life insurance coverage . We can help with that .
When Term Life Insurance expires there may be a couple of choices . With some Term life insurance , the policy just ends . If you want a new policy you would have to apply for a new one . With other Term life insurance policies , you have the option to pay a new , much higher premium . This premium is usually annually renewable and can go up every year . Rather than let the policy expire and have to pay that premium , it would be a better idea to convert the Term policy to a Permanent policy , if that option exists . But converting Term to Permanent must occur before the Term policy expires , sometimes years prior to that time . Review your Term policy 's features to see when the conversion period ends .
When your term life insurance expires , you may have the option to keep paying the premium to keep it in effect . But the price will be much higher than you were paying , and go up every year . Most people look for a new policy when their old term life insurance expires . The rate will most likely be higher than you paid before , because you are older . Your health will also be taken into account . Since you will be paying more , anyway , you may just want to bite the bullet and get at least some permanent insurance . The older you get , the harder it is to qualify for term . But if you want to get a new term policy and can qualify for it , that is what many people do . If you know that your term policy 's expiration date is coming up , you might want to look into converting some or all of your coverage to permanent life insurance -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . This just involves paperwork , no health questions and no exam . But it must be done before your policy expires and according to the conversion period set forth in your term policy .
Term life insurance policies expire when the number of years in the term are up . However , Term life insurance usually has the option to be renewed annually beyond the term . If you choose to pay that new , higher premium , the policy will stay in effect . Or you may be able to convert your Term policy to permanent insurance , in which case it would not expire . Term life insurance also expires when you quit paying the premium . Permanent life insurance , such as Whole Life and Universal Life , will expire if you stop paying the premium and there is not enough cash value left in the policy to pay the premium . If you have paid the premium so that policy is `` paid up '' , however , and you have followed the rules for paying back policy loans , permanent life insurance will never expire .
Term life insurance policies technically do n't expire until age 90 or 95 -LRB- with most carriers -RRB- . However , most people only keep a term life insurance policy until the term premium guarantee period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 20 year term policy , you 're likely only going to carry it until the end of that 20 year period -RRB- . When the term premium guarantee period expires , the policy structure will do one of two things : 1 -RRB- the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- by substantial margins , or 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same and the death benefit will decrease each year . Many people often review their term insurance policies well before the term period expires because they may want to replace the policy with a new one to create a new term period to secure low rates while they 're young and healthy or change the amount of coverage they need to reduce their premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your term insurance coverage , including quotes and policy analysis and comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
If you have a term life insurance that is set to expire soon , run , do n't walk , to find out your options before it expires . You can ask your current agent , call the life insurance company , or pick out an agent you feel you can trust and ask them to compile your options for you . If your health has gotten worse since you took out your term policy , you may not have the option to buy as much coverage as you would like , in a new policy . Converting your term policy to Universal or Whole Life allows you to keep the same amount of coverage and even be rated the same as you were before , without having to answer a single health question . Many term policies are convertible to the end of the term or to a certain age , whichever comes first . Some are only convertible for part of the term . If conversion is not an option , you must either pay the new higher premium , or purchase a new policy when your current term coverage expires .
All life insurance expires it is just a matter of when . Term life insurance is purchased by the expiration date . Term can be purchased by level premiums for 5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . Technically term life insurance will not expire on that date but the premiums will increase drastically in most cases ten fold and expire around age 80 or 85 . On permanent life insurance or cash value life insurance , the expiration is determined by the level of premium . On a whole life or universal life you have different levels of premium known as minimum , target and maximum . The target premium can be set for a certain age . Most common is age 95 or age 100 . There are several companies that will allow the target to be adjusted to an age range of 105 to 150 years old . Which it would be a miracle to live past age 150 , but if one did , the policy would expire .
It depends on the status of the policy , your need , and other available options to you . Most people will cancel a term policy when the initial period of premium guarantee expires -LRB- your term length -RRB- or they have replaced it with a new policy . Life insurance creates cash upon the death of the insured . Those that simply cancel their life insurance policy because they think they no longer have a need for coverage may not think about many of its other uses . Just because the big debts are paid off -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , etc. -RRB- does n't mean the need for life insurance is over . Many people want to have coverage in place for estate planning purposes , income replacement -LRB- so your family can continue their current lifestyle and not have to make drastic changes due to personal finances -RRB- , leaving a legacy to your loved ones , or paying burial expenses and unexpected medical bills surrounding the event of death -LRB- e.g. going to the hospital -RRB- that you just do n't anticipate . When a period of guarantee expires on a term insurance policy , one of two things will happen : 1 -RRB- the policy will change to annual renewable term insurance and the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same and the death benefit will decrease each year -LRB- generally seen on term UL policies - term insurance on a universal life chassis -RRB- . Another reason to continue having life insurance in place is to protect your insurability . For example , if you 've got preferred plus rates and had a heart attack or cancer while your policy is active , you 're not gon na be getting those preferred plus rates again , meaning if you wanted to get another life insurance policy in the future , you would be paying a whole lot more in premiums because would be looking at a higher risk class -LRB- the risk class determines the premiums - the higher the risk class/rating , the higher the premiums are going to be -RRB- . Many people often look at converting all or a portion of the face amount to permanent insurance -LRB- if you 're still within the available conversion period on your policy -RRB- in that scenario because there 's no new medical underwriting and the rates are just recalculated based on your age and the type of program it 's converted to -LRB- universal or whole life -RRB- . Before canceling any life insurance policy , you should always discuss it with your agent to make sure it 's the right course of action for you so you do n't miss something or realize there was a need where you thought there was n't one . You do n't want to look back and say I wish I still had that coverage .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Term life insurance policies do eventually expire . Some expire at the end of the term . Some become annually renewable term policies at the end of the term , then expire some years after that . Whether or not your term policy expires , the price usually becomes unaffordable at the end of the term you originally took out . It is better to convert your policy to permanent insurance before your term ends , if you have that option . With many term policies , converting them to permanent will allow you to lock in a premium for the rest of your life .
Yes term insurance ends at a certain age as stated in the policy contract . The age that term policies expire has risen over the years . I have observed over that the age most term insurance policies expire is a couple of years before projected life expectancy . For example when life expectancy was 67 , policies expired at 65 , 76 then 75 , Now most expire at age 85 . Term policies do contain a conversion to permanent insurance before a specified date . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
When you buy a home insurance policy , its not a contract for life . If you are unhappy with your current coverage , you can easily switch to a new home insurance company . Before making this move , there are just a few things you need to do beforehand . The first thing you should do is review your current insurance policy . See when it is scheduled to end as well as if there are any costs for ending your contract early . For example , if you cancel a prepaid policy , some companies give you your unearned premium payments back while others will not . Check to see if it makes more financial sense to cancel the policy or just wait for it to expire . When you decide to make a move , you can contact your new insurance company and ask them to set up your new policy . You will need to fill out a short application to set up your coverage . When you submit your application , be sure to include your insurance premium as well . You wont be covered until after the insurance company receives your premium payment . Once your new policy is up and running , you can cancel your old policy . Call up your old company and tell them you want to end your coverage . They will mail you a document telling you your coverage is over and will also return any money they might owe you . After you finish cancelling your policy , you have finished switching home insurance companies .
Term Life has it 's place , but overall for most people I would advise against it . Term insurance expires at the end of it 's `` term '' - hence the name Term . Every year older we get , everything else being the same , the cost of insurance goes higher . So if you buy a 20 year term policy at age 30 , and you do n't implement a whole or permanent life policy during that time , at the end of the term you will have no more insurance and the cost to buy a new policy may then be prohibitive . Also Term insurance has no cash value , so the only benefit connected with Term insurance is to your beneficiary if you die before the term is expired . Is it the `` best '' ? I would say definitely No .
If you have Term life insurance , the policy will expire when the term ends . So if you have 20 year term , the policy will expire at the end of year 20 . Either that , or it will jump up to a price that is unaffordable for most people . If Whole Life for which premiums have been paid on time and , if there there loans , the loans have been repaid with interest , the policy will not expire . It may endow , which means the cash value equals the face amount , allowing you to take the proceeds while alive . But it will not expire . Universal Life that has a no lapse guarantee is similar to Whole Life . Most Universal Life policies have a shorter guaranteed period after which they might expire . Usually , they last much longer per current interest rates . You would have to order a current illustration to find out how much time is left on your UL at both current and guaranteed interest rates .
Yes , a life insurance policy can expire . Some Term policies will expire at the end of the term , while others will go into years of annually renewable term -LRB- meaning the premium can go up every year -RRB- before the policy expires . Permanent insurance will not expire if it is set up to last until death at any age , and if all policy payments are on time with no unpaid loans . Some permanent life insurance policies are set up to expire at a certain time .
It depends on the type . Assuming you consistently pay your premiums , if you have term insurance , it can expire . If you have permanent insurance , then no . Term insurance keeps the premiums fixed and guaranteed for a specific number of years -LRB- e.g. 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . After the term period has expired , the premiums change to annual renewable term insurance and increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . You can elect to continue the existing term insurance policy up until age 90 or 95 -LRB- with most policies -RRB- , however , the price to keep that policy in force becomes astronomical and you would never pay it past the first couple of years . Most people replace a term insurance policy with a new term or permanent policy . Permanent insurance is designed to cover you for the rest of your life . The only way a permanent insurance can expire early is if it 's `` dialed down '' - meaning the death benefit is designed to only go to a specific age/policy year -LRB- e.g. dialed down to age 90 -RRB- . Dialing down a policy can be useful to reduce your premiums , but still provide good coveragelongevity . I hope the input helps . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When the guarantee period on a term life insurance policy expires , you have several choices you can make : 1 -RRB- You can continue your coverage , however , the policy becomes annually renewable and the premiums increase each year by a substantial margin -LRB- based on age -RRB- . 2 -RRB- You can terminate the policy and end the coverage . 3 -RRB- You can stop paying premiums and allow the policy to lapse on its own . 4 -RRB- If you still need coverage , work with an independent insurance broker to secure a new policy with a new guarantee period -LRB- either for a set term period or guarantee the policy for life -RRB- - you want to do this before the existing policy 's guarantee period expires . Keep in mind , underwriting can take up to 6-8 weeks to complete so you want to allow enough time to get a new policy in place . # 4 is the course of action most people generally take as you will generally need some level of coverage for the rest of your life , whether it 's to cover a mortgage , income replacement , final expenses , etc. . Send me a private message on here if you would like assistance with your coverage .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Does Car Insurance Give For A Totaled Car ?
When it is determined that the cost to repair a car is greater than the value of the car the adjuster contacts the owner and tells them of the decision . At that time the adjuster will make an offer for the car based upon current market conditions , minus the deductible if applicable . The insured can either accept or decline the offer . A settlement means that the company and the policyholder agree on the amount . The title to the car transfers to the insurance company .
The amount can vary by car and company , but there is a gneral rule of thumb that is a pretty good guide . Usualy , a car is `` totalled '' when the insurance claims adjuster appraises the damage and compares the cost to repair with the `` book value '' of the car . There are various sources to determine the value of a car including , but not limited to , Kelly Blue Bookor the NADA guide as examples . Generally , if the cost to repair is about 70 % of the car 's value , it is likely that the adjuster will recommend categorizing the car as a total loss and will offer you a settlement sum that is in the neighborhood of the repair cost .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
Car insurance is important to have for a number of reasons , the big one being it 's generally required by law ! But if that is n't enough to convince you , here are some other reasons it 's important to have car insurance : 1 -RRB- Car insurance protects YOU . Your bodily injury and property damagelimits determine how much the insurance company will pay if you are sued . So , if you have bodily injury limits of 50/100 , your insurance company will only pay $ 50,000 per person and a total of $ 100,000 per accident . If the amount you are sued for is $ 350,000 , guess who is paying the rest ... 2 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your PASSENGERS . What if you are in an accident , the OTHER driver is at fault , but they do n't have any or enough insurance ? That is when your insurance can help again , IF you have uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage . This coverage is similar to the bodily injury/property damage coverage already discussed , but this coverage is to protect you and your passengers in case you are hit by an uninsured or underinsured motorist . 3 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your CAR -LRB- and your wallet -RRB- . If you have Comprehensive -LRB- or Other than Collision -RRB- and Collision coverage on your car , then your car can be repaired and the repairs will be paid for by the insurance company , minus your deductible . This coverage is generally required ONLY if you have a loan or a lease on the vehicle , but it could be a good idea to sit down with your insurance agent and see if your vehicle should have this coverage .
If your car is considered totaled then a good indicator would go look at NADA > com or Kelly blue book online this would be a close estimate as to what they will give you now if you decided to keep the car you can do that also but you will get less cash for your car from the claim . Another way you can do this is make sure that you know the value of your auto you can call car dealerships and they can tell you what the car was worth prior to the accident . Insurance is to indemnify not to put you ahead . What you think your car is worth may not be as much as an adjuster thinks so be prepared and have a realistic value for your auto . Also if you had optional permanently attached equipment make sure that your policy had that listed or you may not get the value of that included . Hope this helps My best suggestion is to talk to you agent they should be able to help you with determining the value .
The amount can vary by car and company , but there is a gneral rule of thumb that is a pretty good guide . Usualy , a car is `` totalled '' when the insurance claims adjuster appraises the damage and compares the cost to repair with the `` book value '' of the car . There are various sources to determine the value of a car including , but not limited to , Kelly Blue Bookor the NADA guide as examples . Generally , if the cost to repair is about 70 % of the car 's value , it is likely that the adjuster will recommend categorizing the car as a total loss and will offer you a settlement sum that is in the neighborhood of the repair cost .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
That is a great question ! An auto insurance company will generally total your car when the cost of the repairs is near to , or exceeds , the approximate retail -LRB- Sometimes referred to as the `` Blue Book '' -RRB- value of the car . As the retail value is much lower in cars that are several years old , these cars are more likely to be totaled . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Many insurance companies will allow you to buy back a vehicle which they have declared to be a total loss . The key is to let the insurance company know immediately that you want to retain the car regardless of their decision on repairs . Once the car has been determined to be totaled it will be sent to a salvage yard and off to auction or dismantle . Once it is in that system it is difficult to retrieve the car , so let the insurance company know immediately that you want to keep the car . The insurance company will then adjust the settlement to include the value of the car in its current condition .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Insurers typically use insurance scores not credit scores , but they are in-bedded with some of the same information . For most insurers this is one way of measuring your responsibility . Responsibility is a key ingredient in knowing if you understand what risks you are taking . Let me give you an example . Suppose you want to hand the keys of a new Ferrari over to a 16 year old . An insurer is going to look at that and say . . wait a minute , does that driver know how to drive such a powerful and expensive car . Will he or she give someone else the keys and let them drive . will he or she be using the car for delivery of Pizzas . All of those things might require a specific answer . Yet insurance scores give an insurer information on how you have acted in variety of situations and credit is part of that shorthand that conveys to an insurer that you are or are not a generally responsible person . The most accurate measure of how you will drive is how often you will drive . So be sure to add that element to your discussion with an agent . He or she may have polices from insurers who give discounts to those who use a vehicle say less than 4.000 mile s a year . Talk to your agent and give him or her enough information to be able to accurately present you and your exposures to many companies .
I am not sure exactly what you mean by this question . My thoughts are that you are referring to a policy that will pay the excess amount if your car is totaled and you still owe more than the car is worth . For example , you owe $ 25000 on your car and it is totaled . The insurance company pays the book , which is $ 20,000 . Under some polices you are still on the hook for the balance , even though you no longer have the car . A policy that includes excess would pay off the car completely .
This can vary of course , but generally speaking , and insurance company will determine a car to be a `` total loss '' if the amount of money needed to repair the damage exceeds the value of the car . A good rule of thumb is that if say the cost to repair your car is in the neighborhood of 70 % of the `` book value '' of that car , it is more likely that the company will total it . This is because in most cases , all of the possible damage can not be identified until the car starts being torn down .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Have Two Types Of Health Insurance ?
Yes , you can generally have any number of health insurance plans you want . Several people have a primary and secondary health insurer . The secondary insurance typically covers health care costs that the primary insurance policy does not cover . If you do have two health insurance plans , you should be sure to make the health care provider well aware of this fact so they know to coordinate between the multiple insurers and bill accordingly .
Everything mentioned above is correct . You need to also consider when selecting Life Insurance for somebody that 's older the underwriting process you 'll have to go through . Depending on the benefit amount , some companies have a nonmedical underwriting process . That means mom and dad do n't have to give a blood or urine sample . You 'll see these type of plans on TV . Yet be aware of what you 're buying . Most of the TV Brands do not have guaranteed level premiums for life , or the death benefit is n't paid in full for the first two years . Allow me to explain in more detail . These plans are often called final expense Life Insurance . Generally speaking there or two ways the benefits are paid out . If your parents or in overall good health , without a major event like a heart attack or cancer in the last two years , they should be eligible for what 's called an immediate benefit . Once the policies approved the death benefit is available the next day . The other type is called a graded benefit -LRB- or call date modified benefit in some cases -RRB- . Again , generally speaking , most of these plans have a limited payout the first two years of policy is in force . Some pay a percentage of the death benefit while others refund all your premiums plus an interest rate . These plans are great if mom and dad are in poor health . Some applications have zero medical questions . I often see where someone is sold a graded benefit when they could have received a level benefit with a different carrier . Underwriting is the key factor ! If your parents are in good health they may want to consider a fully underwritten policy . That typically includes a small medical exam . Think of it this way , the deeper the carrier looks into somebody 's health , the better their rate for the same benefit will be . Then there 's the whole question of what type of insurance to get . Whole Life -LRB- which is what the Final expense plans are -RRB- , Term , or Universal Life . The Orman 's and Ramsey 's of the world will tell you to buy nothing else than term . . ever , ever , ever ... . I 'm not going to debate that now . Just going to say they are hurting a lot of people with such narrow , cookie cutter advice . ALL life insurance types have a time & place . If you have further questions ... Reach out . Honored to help ... - gravy .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Yes , you can have two or more policies , as long as you qualify financially for the total amount of coverage . Some mixed families take out two policies , rather than have their biological children and stepchildren have to split the same policy proceeds . Or , they take two policies so their divorced spouse has a different policy than their current spouse . Those who own business policies may need to keep them separate from personal policies for tax reasons . Sometimes having two policies is better than one , because the death benefit will be covering two completely different types of needs . E.g. . You might want a small policy to cover your funeral expenses , which would necessitate some type of permanent insurance . But you might also want a larger policy to pay off your mortgage , and 10 year Term -LRB- which usually costs much less than Whole or Universal Life -RRB- may be a much more economical choice for that particular need .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
PPO is not a type of health insurance . It is an abbreviation for Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- which describes the network provider contracting approach associated with whatever health insurance plan you are purchasing . PPO network based health insurance products have dominated the marketplace for many years so it is not unusual for the consumer to blend the two . After January 1 , 2014 you will want to have your health insurance agent check for you , or if you are a `` do it yourselfer `` do someresearching online to determine the type of provider network associated with health plans you may be interested in . The traditional features of PPO plan designs have been to have office visit & prescription copayments , lower deductibles , higher co-insurance levels and lower out-of-pocket financial exposure for using in-network PPO providers while still having coverage for voluntary usage of non-network providers at reduced benefit levels . PPO plans are the dominant network arrangement in the current health insurance marketplace . However , changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , are causing insurance carriers to re-design their products and this does extend to the design of their provider networks . This is especially true of the health insurance products sold in the government health insurance marketplaces where the consumer may encounter multiple network or sub-network type provider arrangements in this environment . For instance , here in Tennessee , the BC/BS plan offers essentially the same insurance products with pricing based on your choice of 3 different PPO networks at 3 different price points . The larger the PPO provider network you choose the higher the insurance premium associated with the product . In fact , the smallest of the 3 BC/BS network options is offered only in the government marketplace . So , these are words of caution , there are degrees of difference even within what are technically PPO based products these days . Do n't just assume that a provider is going to be in-network with an insurance carrier based upon your past experience . Verify with both the insurance carrier and the doctor 's office that they are a participating provider . Also , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace starting in 2014 , you will want to be aware of the growing move back to Point-of-Service -LRB- POS -RRB- , Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- and Accountable Care Organization -LRB- ACO -RRB- based provider delivery systems associated with a growing number of health insurance products . These other variations on the theme apply more stringent guidelines to provider access in a variety of ways -LRB- reduced network sizes , gate keeper referral arrangements , sharply reduced or no out-of-network coverage -RRB- and introduce entirely new considerations for the consumer .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
There are two main types of life insurance , term and permanent , The other types of policies fit into those two groups . Term insurance covers you for a period of time , called a term . Term insurance is usually , but not always , guaranteed not to go up in price for that term of years . It usually does not have any cash value . Permanent insurance can cover you for the rest of your life , or permanently . But you need to check on the terms of permanent insurance , as not all are guaranteed to cover you for the rest of your life , and for some , the premium is not guaranteed to remain level . Permanent insurance usually has some cash value . To be sure you are buying the best type of policy or policies for your needs , contact a licensed agent to help you determine which type of life insurance will cover the loss you intend it to cover .
The two basic types of life insurance are permanent -LRB- whole life -RRB- and term life . Whole life insurance is designed to provide a death benefit from now until your last day . These policies grow cash value over time that can serve as an additional nest egg after retirement . Term life policies are coverages for a specific period of time . Many working adults use term life to protect their lives while their children are young to ensure they will be properly cared for if at least one parent were to pass away . Each type of policy has a few variations . For example universal life , variable life and final expense are all forms of whole life insurance . Income protection and mortgage protection are types of term insurance . Even though they fall under the two basic types of life insurance , they can all be used for different reasons depending on the consumer 's need .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 9497972424 .
The types of Disability Insurance that you can buy on your own come in two types : Short Term Disability Insurance and Long Term Disability Insurance . Of the two , Long Term Disability Insurance is most commonly purchased . When provided by an employer , Sick Leave is also a type of Short Term Disability Insurance .
The average price for home insurance can vary greatly based on several factors . If two different people applied for the same level of coverage on the exact same property , their prices could be different , based on how similar the applicants were . The primary factors that are considered for pricing home insurance include the age of the applicant , the occupation or education of the applicant -LRB- if the insurance company offers discounts for affinity groups -RRB- , the number of adults living in the residence , and the claims history for the applicant . And this is assuming we are looking at two applicants for the same property . There are factors that adjust the price based on the differences between properties as well , so the same person applying for two similar properties may receive higher or lower premiums based on the rating factors for the residence . For example , if the property has a pool , whether the pool is fenced or unfenced , the proximity to a fire hydrant , the age and type of roofing materials , and so on . Most policies I write for Home Insurance come out to be between $ 60 and $ 120 a month , depending on the level of coverage selected . But since every customer is different , and two homes on the same street will get different rates , I always recommend contacting a licensed insurance professional to obtain quotes . It 's best to get at least 2 or 3 quotes and compare both the premium amounts and the type of coverage . Do n't just buy based on price alone , or you may wind up with less coverage than you need .
-- > Normal 0 All homeowners policies will cover your home and personal property should it be damaged but the type of damage you are covered for is defined in two general types of insuring agreements . One type -LRB- Named Peril -RRB- will tell you what specific types of damage you are covered for . The policies will actually name them ; fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , vandalism , etc. . For damage to be covered , you have to prove to the insurance company that the damage you sustained was caused by one of these named perils . The second type of insuring agreement -LRB- often referred to as all-risk -RRB- covers you for any direct damage unless the policy specifically excludes or limits it . Under this form of insurance , any damage is covered unless the insurance company can prove a specific exclusion or limitation applies . The burden of proof shifts from you proving you are covered under a Named Peril policy to the insurance company proving you are not covered under an All-Risk type policy . A small difference which means a lot should you have a claim . The term all-risk isnt used too much anymore ; this type of policy is often referred to as Special Form or Open Peril policies . Whatever you want to call them , this is the type of insuring agreement you should look for . Most of us are not prepared to prove anything to an insurance company . Its also much easier to understand what you are not covered for simply by reading the exclusions and limitations .
Disability insurance is an insurance policy that replaces up to 70 % of your income should you become injured or ill and can no longer preform your normal duties of your current occupation . There are two basic types of disability insurance . The first is called short term disability which pays after a short elimination period to cover immediate living expenses . Most short term policies expire within two years . The second type of disability insurance is long term . These policies cover income for a longer period of time from two years to age 67 years old .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Yes , they can , in certain situations . I 'll say first that I can only answer for Michigan but most states do behave similarly . Your eligibility for auto insurance with a standard carrier is measured on a point system . To be eligible for a standard carrier in Michigan , you can not have more than 6 eligibility points . The point system is pretty simple , with more points for more serious infractions . For instance , a speeding ticket for 5mph over the speed limit , and other similar violations are worth two points while an at fault accident is worth three . These points do have an expiration , normally two to three years for accidents and minor violations . Major violations such as a DUI or wreckless driving expire in five years and one of these deems you ineligible . Your insurance company can cancel your policy if you reach 7 points or more that have n't expired . Two at fault accidents in the last three years will also get you here as your second at fault is charged four eligibility points . Two things to consider : First , you can still get insurance if you have been cancelled but it 'll cost you a lot more . Second , do n't think that , just because the judge said he 'd waive the points from a ticket , these wo n't count for insurance purposes because they will . If it shows up on a driving record or a claims record , the companies have no choice but to apply them . If you have a good agent , he can find coverage for you even if you 've been cancelled by a company . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and listen to him/her . You 'll come out better in the long run .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Yes , life insurance in force at the death of the life insured pays out the death benefit proceeds once proof of death has been submitted . The life insurer can not deny a claim unless due to either suicide in the first two policy years or a material misrepresentation in the first two years of the policy . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . Life insurance is something you need to qualify for in advance - the insured must be insurable , the owner must have an insurable interest , etc. . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in cases of fraud .
Unless you have an accidental death policy , your Life insurance would cover any type of death . Some policies may exclude war or act of war . Most policies also have a two year suicide clause , stating they will not pay if you commit suicide within two years of policy issue . There is also a two year incontestability clause which gives the insurance company the right to contest the pay out if they feel that there was erroneous information provided on the application that was relied upon to issue the policy within two years of policy issue . .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Mortgage Insurance And Homeowners Insurance The Same Thing ?
No , not really . Mortgage Insurance is usually a type of Life Insurance , customarily term , that is designed to cover an amount needed to pay off a mortgage n the event that the Homeowner dies . Homeowners ' Insurance on the other hand is coverage that protectes your home from covered perils such as fire , wind , theft , etc. .
The Mortgage itself is a Loan Account setting up a method of repayment ; the repayment structure includes interest over the term of the loan . Monthly payments on a mortgage loan account are sometimes referred to as : P&I -LRB- Principal and Interest -RRB- . At the request of the customer and in some cases , as a requirement to the mortgage contract , an Impound Account -LRB- Escrow Account -RRB- will be initiated in order to accommodate the bi-annual payment of property taxes as well as an annual payment of home insurance . This account will pay a nominal interest rate credited to the account at the end of each year . If the customer has an Impound Account , the monthly mortgage payments will include a monthly savings amount which will be deposited directly into the impound -LRB- escrow -RRB- account in order to accumulate funds to pay future tax and insurance invoices . Regarding Homeowners Insurance , the policy must be purchased by the homeowner and the mortgage company must be listed as the Mortgage Loss Payee ; copies of all documents will be mailed to the mortgage company including invoices . If a homeowner does not purchase home insurance , the mortgage contract allows the mortgage company to place ` Forced Insurance ' on the property and charge the surcharged premium to the mortgage account ; this is not in the interest of the homeowner and should be avoided in the interest of premium amount and coverage afforded . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There are two types of insurance that are known as mortgage insurance . When mortgage companies offer something other than a conventional loan they will often require the borrower to buy mortgage insurance which protects the mortgage company from default . There is also a form of life insurance which is designed to provide a death benefit that equals the balance due on a mortgage . Neither of these are the same as a homeowners policy . The homeowners policy protects the residence and contents against named perils . The homeowners policy also provides protection from personal injury and property damage lawsuits .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
The term ` Escrow ' has a double meaning . Escrow is utilized mainly in the Western States as the legal process of closing the purchase or refinancing transaction of real property ; Escrow Companies exist to facilitate the purchase , sale & refinancing of real property transactions . In States where Escrow Companies are not used , Mortgage and Title Companies utilize ` Closing Professionals ' to facilitate the same process . During the Escrow/Closing process , if a mortgage is involved , it is customary for the mortgage lender to require that all taxes are current and property insurance is paid in full for the first year . Escrow companies will be charged with the fiduciary responsibility to assure the mortgage company upon funding that both conditions have been met and proven . The term Escrow is also used synonymously with a Mortgage Impound Account which is simply a savings account setup for the purpose of saving funds in preparation of making payments to renew property insurance and property taxes ; a mortgage company or bank will simply calculate the necessary amount to be deposited into the Escrow/Impound account monthly in order for a shortage not to exist when future property tax and future property insurance invoices are presented . The monthly calculation usually involves the addition of the annual property tax and the annual property insurance , a 10 % safety buffer is added , then the total is divided by 12 . The account is an interest bearing account and an annual assessment summary is sent to the mortgage holder at the end of each year . There is usually no charge associated with having this account ; it is simply to facilitate payments without the burden of a large obligation at one time for the mortgage holder . It is important for homeowners to understand the escrow and/or impound process as there seems to be many misconceptions of how the process works . It is a very simple process but the most confusing to the ley person is the fact that he/she is actually depositing a monthly savings amount into an account which will pay future invoices presented . Property Taxes are generally invoiced twice a year and Homeowners Insurance is generally invoiced once a year ; money is saved on a monthly basis in order for the funds to be present when the invoices arrive . For a further and/or more detailed explanation , you may wish to contact your Real Estate , Mortgage and or Escrow/Closing Professional directly .
This question addresses the issue of policy names . A home policy could mean a homeowners insurance policy . A mortgage policy could be talking about the policy that protects a lender from default on a loan . The mortgage policy could also be talking about a term insurance policy that provides enough money to pay off the mortgage in the event of death during the term of the policy -LRB- and hopefully the mortgage . -RRB- Another problem is that there is a variety of property insurance policies , any one of which might satisfy a lender . Knowing the list of covered perils is critical and understanding the value added in a homeowners form is essential . The bottom line is that the home policy is probably designed to satisfy a lender and restore a damaged home for the benefit of the homeowner . The mortgage policy is generally designed to either insure enough money to pay off the mortgage or protect the lender against default by the borrower .
When you purchase traditional life insurance to cover your mortgage , you are buying a policy that will pay the same death benefit for the entire length of the policy , regardless of what your mortgage is at that time . Most people leave the death benefit to a personal beneficiary who they can trust to pay off the mortgage , or to a trust that stipulates to use the death benefit in that fashion . However , one of the nice things about using life insurance for mortgage protection , is that a beneficiary may decide to keep the mortgage and use the death benefit in another way , if that is more favorable to them . This may especially be true at this time of very low mortgage interest rates . Some people take the step of reducing their policy coverage as their mortgage gets past a certain point of being paid off .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners insurance is mandatory because the house is thecollateral on the debt that you owe the lender . If you did n't pay your mortgage then the bank has the right to foreclose on your property and sell it to recoup the money that they lent you . The lender protects their collateral by being listed on your homeowner policy as `` Loss Payee '' . -LRB- The one paid when a loss happens -RRB- . If their collateral -LRB- your home -RRB- burns up in a fire , and then someone stops paying their mortgage , they would have no asset and no mortgage payments coming in . Item of note : If you decide that you do n't want to have homeowners coverage on the home , the lender can add insurance -LRB- that only protects their interest in the home -RRB- and make you , the homeowner/mortgagee , pay for it on top of their mortgage payment . It is one of the many clauses that you initialed when you signed your mortgage agreement .
You can own a home without having homeowners insurance but more than likely you will need to maintain the coverage as a requirement of your mortgage contract . Most mortgage companies require `` Hazard Insurance '' to protect their investment in your home . If you fail to maintain `` Hazard Insurance '' , or commonly known as homeowners insurance , the mortgage company will put `` forced insurance '' on your home . The forced insurance policy will be much more expensive and will have inferior coverage . Some are even considered a `` single interest '' policy . This means that the mortgage company is the only beneficiary under the policy -LRB- you get nothing -RRB- . We do not recommend owning a home without homeowners insurance . For many people their home is their largest asset and you should protect it .
The mortgage company will require `` Hazard Insurance '' as part of your mortgage contract . In my experience they are looking for a homeowners insurance policy that will cover the replacement of the home . In the contract it usually states that if you fail to maintain hazard insurance they may purchase it on your behalf . So to answer the question is Hazard & Homeowners insurance the same . . the answer is yes-if you 're speaking about the mortgage requirements .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Life insurance is usually not required as a stipulation of getting a mortgage unless the down payment is very low . Then the borrower is required to buy a type of insurance called `` PMI '' , or Private Mortgage Insurance . This coverage would pay the lender what is owed to them in the case of the borrower 's death . However , many people do use regular life insurance to cover their mortgages . Term life insurance can be purchased in the same number of years as the mortgage ; is a reasonable cost for that what can be a large amount of coverage ; the benefit does not decrease as the mortgage goes down ; and it goes to the beneficiary of your choice . Especially with today 's low mortgage rates , it may not be in the best interest of the beneficiary to pay off the mortgage . Having a life insurance benefit to invest or pay other bills could allow the survivor to keep paying the mortgage and keep the home . Or they could pay it off and keep the remainder of the life insurance proceeds .
Yes hazard insurance is the same as homeowners insurance . It 's just different terms used by different people . So your lender may say homeowners insurance or hazard insurance or fire insurance and your talking about the same thing . This term may also be used by title companies as well . Usually it more of a location verbiage . Peoples in different areas just use different terms for the same thing .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
No , the State of CT does not make it mandatory to have Homeowners ' Insurance , but if you have a Mortgage , then your lender does . When you are buying a home or otherwise obtaining a mortgage or home equity on a home , your lender , among other things will ask you to provide a copy of a binder or amended Homeowners Declaration Sheet showing them listed as an interested party on your property . They do this to protect their own interest , which makes perfect sense . However , if you have property , mortgage or not , this can be one of the most important investments you will make in your lifetime . Frankly , mandatrory or not , you owe it to yourself to protect your own interest and your family 's home .
Mortgage companies commonly use the term `` Hazard Insurance '' to mean broad form property coverege that is found in Homeowners Insurance policies . The term in this case really means the same thing . Mortgage Companies require that you show proof that you have adequate Property coverage in order to repair oir rebuild your home in the event of a covered loss .
Home insurance protects your home and your possessions against accidental loss or damage . You can find an agent to help you determine your needs very easily . Mortgage insurance could mean one of two things . PMI or Private Mortgage Insurance allows you to take out a larger loan from the bank than you might normally qualify for . This is because the insurance company is promising to pay the bank money if you can not pay your mortgage for some reason . This is usually provided through a company that works with the bank . MPI or Mortgage Protection Insurance is a type of term life insurance . This insurance pays off your mortgage if you die or , depending on the plan , are unable to work . You can find a local life insurance agent who can help you with this plan .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does My Auto Insurance Cover A Moving Truck ?
Great Qutestion . Generally personal car insurance does not cover a moving truck . Since a moving truck is consider a commercial vehicle . You can buy insurance from the moving company that rents you the truck . And always check with your current insurance compay for rules and regulation on that particular question .
Great Qutestion . Generally personal car insurance does not cover a moving truck . Since a moving truck is consider a commercial vehicle . You can buy insurance from the moving company that rents you the truck . And always check with your current insurance compay for rules and regulation on that particular question .
I think your asking the question if you rent a moving truck will your auto insurance apply . Always double check with your own insurance company but in general if the vehicle you are renting is over 10,000 GVW you will not be covered by your personal auto policy and would need to purchase the insurance offered by the moving truck rental company .
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
If we were to average the insurance cost on one new car of every make and model , and do the same for every truck and SUV , the difference in cost between the rate will largely be the difference between the group of cars with a higher average value . Recent research has shown trucks to be slightly less expensive for occupants because they weather an accident better in a vehicle with greater mass -LRB- weight -RRB- . On the other hand , trucks are causing slightly greater injuries to those hit by trucks and inside the cars they hit . Dollar for dollar I 'd give a very slight edge to trucks as cheaper to insure .
There are a couple of angles on this question . And as always , check with your agent . Coverage varies by state and insurance company . In Illinois , your owned vehicle insurance policy generally extends coverage to the temporary use of a rental car , rented in the 50 states and Canada . The same coverage applies . That means that if you do NOT have physical damage coverages on your own policy , i.e. collision and comprehensive , you wo n't have them for the rental vehicle either . You would then need to purchase the physical damage waiver from the rental agency . All of this discussion refers to the rental of a private passenger vehicle . If you 're moving and rent a truck for your belongings , your personal auto insurance will probably not cover it . If the original question relates to coverage to pay for a rental vehicle , most companies provide the optional coverage in the event of a covered claim .
Your car insurance will cover you for liability but it may not cover damage to the Uhaul if you are in an accident or damage the truck . Check with your local agent or company to be sure that your policy covers the truck and to what extent . It only costs about $ 14 to purchase the extra insurance from Uhaul and it will cover any damage you do the truck with just a couple exceptions .
In almost all cases your personal auto insurance will not cover you if you rent a U haul truck . The U Haul truck will fall out of the bounds of personal auto used for pleasure and also the weight category put the vehicle is the commercial range which is 10,000 lbs or higher . I highly recommend you discuss this with your current insurance company for clarity on your particular policy .
As a big do it yourselfer , the answer is maybe ? It depends on what your situation is and how adept you are on gathering information and making a good decision from all the information out there . I mean I like to work on my cars and trucks . I can do many things myself and feel really good about it . However , I do still use my trusted mechanic for the things I simply am not good enough to do myself and that way I avoid putting my family at risk . As another noted , there are absolutely no price savings in going without an agent . The laws in most states prevent any discounting for doing it yourself . It never ever hurts to become informed about a product . I have taught my son the doctor , how to frame a house , wire a house and have a general understanding about construction . He 's a doctor now , and yes , that is fun to say , he has learned enough about how to build that when he decides to build , he can have a good conversation with a builder and know when to call shenanigans or not . By all means it pays to educate yourself , but understand that an open mind is required to educate yourself .
My previous career was for a rental company so I have a great deal of knowledge in this area . When determining purchasing insurance when renting a car it is important to consider these main factors . 1 -RRB- Quality of your own insurance policy If you have state minimum coverage dont except much help from your insurance company if something were to happen . 2 -RRB- Purpose of Rental - Yes , The reason why you are renting the car plays a big factor . Some insurance policies will only cover rental vehicles if it is a replacement rental . So if you are renting for a family vacation there is a possibility that you arent covered . Always check with your insurance company . 3 -RRB- Type of Vehicle Another huge factor , a lot of policies wont cover any vehicles that are built on a pick up truck frame . Most consumers are unaware that some minivans and SUVs are in fact built upon a pickup truck frames . The best way to protect yourself against this is to always rent a vehicle that similar to the car on your policy -LRB- If you have a SUV on your policy , you should be safe to drive a SUV -RRB- 4 -RRB- Does your credit card cover it ? A little known benefit -LRB- that most credit cards have -RRB- is rental coverage ! Some will require you to activate it before renting a vehicle while others will give it you automatically . I would always check with your credit card provider to see which type of coverage you have . They often pay for loss-of-use as well which is an extra bonus that most insurance policies wont cover . 5 -RRB- The Length of the rental - The longer the rental the more expensive the rental insurance becomes . At some point the amount of money you are paying for the extra insurance isnt going to be worth it . That breaking point is up to you to decide . 6 -RRB- If something were to happen right now , what can you afford ? I think this is the most important . The most common rental is a 3 day weekend rental . The typical insurance cost for that that length of time can be $ 60 to $ 200 . However , the cost of damage , loss of use , and deductibles can add up to be $ 2,000 and get as high as the total loss value of the vehicle . If you were to total out a vehicle would your insurance cover it ? Or could you afford a $ 20,000 vehicle that you wont drive ? 7 -RRB- Remember it is not your vehicle ! Very often damage happens to our own vehicle and we dont even notice or care because we consider the damage to be minimal . However this is not the case when renting a vehicle . You do not have control over what damages are fixed and which ones arent . So Keep in mind that a ding to you , could be consider major damage to them . At the end of the day , you have to be honest with yourself and determine if purchasing the extra insurance is worth it or not . Not every situation is a same and multiple factors needs to be taken into account .
Your car insurance will cover a rental car if you carry full coverage on your policy . If you have an accident in a rental car you will still be subject to your comprehensive and collision deductibles . Some companies will not cover commercial trucks -LRB- example : Uhaul truck -RRB- or vans so check with your agent just to be sure .
Do you buy running shoes for a marathon form Wal-Mart ???? Do you buy a 4 cylinder truck to pull a trailer that really demands a V8 ? My point is , `` WHO CARES who has the cheapest '' . Yes , there is a way to assess apples to apples when buying home insurance . Red vs. green apples . There are always some differences in policies . However , in my state , there is a vast difference in plans offered . You are buying something to guard your finances in the event of the loss of your home , valuables , or retirement -LRB- that 's called Liability Coverage folks -RRB- . BUY THE MOST you can reasonably afford . I did a quote once and for curiosity I raised our `` in house standard amount of liability '' form 300K to 500K -LRB- the next step up for that carrier -RRB- ... What did I see ???? A ONE DOLLAR difference ... Yes ... ONE dollar . $ 200,000 more in coverage for a buck . That does n't happen for everyone and every carrier . Yet it 's almost always less than $ 10 a month . WOW ... 200K more for $ 10 a month ... . You 'll pay the price if you buy on price . - gravy
All personal auto insurance policies will have a vehicle weight limit for the vehicles they cover . While most will cover the policyholder in other vehicles , the coverage will not apply in vehicles that exceed that weight limit . You will need to read your specific policy to know exactly which Uhaul trucks would be covered . It may be only the smaller ones or it may be none at all .
The liability coverage of your personal auto policy extends to the U-Haul trailer you have rented . The physical damage coverage does not . You will need to insure the trailer with the U-Haul people . Check with your agent if you have a question involving rental of a truck . There might be limitations on that .
Most auto insurance companies/vehicle insurance companiesoffer a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount : typically , a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is when you have 2 or more vehicles -LRB- cars , trucks , SUVs , motorcycles ... -RRB- on the same type ofpolicy . Insurance companies usually do n't allow the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount for different types of motorized vehicles on different policies . For example - if you have a car on one policy and a motorcycle on a different policy -LRB- but both policies are with the same insurance company -RRB- then usually you would not get a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount . You would get the multi-car discountif you have 2 cars insured on the same auto insurance policy . Also , most companies that insure motorcycles will give a multi-unit discount if you insure 2 or more motorcycles on the same motorcycle insurance policy . The key point with the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is that you are usually required to have 2 or more vehicles covered on the same policy . It is always best to review with your professional independent insurance broker to find the coverage options , as well as ways to secureall availablediscounts -LRB- so you wo n't end up paying more than you have to for your insurance -RRB- .
Are you renting your brother 's pickup for personal or business purpose ? If for personal use , your policy will be excess based to your brother policy . For example , if there is an accident , your brother 's policy will go first and if limits are exhausted , your insurance will provide coverage on the top of your brother 's policy limits . If you rent the truck for the business purpose , make sure you have Hired/Non-Owned coverage endorsement on your business liability coverage or commercial auto policy . This coverage usually runs at $ 100 - $ 200 per year and provide a great deal of coverage for cars you borrow , rent or hire to use in business . You can compare personal and business liability and auto insurance quotes on WEBSITELINK
Falling objects whether they are trees , airplane parts , stones from a gravel truck or something else are covered under comprehensive . Comprehensive covers the physical damage of your vehicle for everything except collision . Fire , theft , vandalism , as well as chipped windshields are a typical comprehensive claim . Comprehensive which is an optional coverage since it covers your vehicle usually has a deductible . Once you satisfy the deductible the insurance company pays the rest . It can be frustrating to pay the deductible when you have n't done anything wrong . If the damage was caused by someone who was negligent , let your insurance company know so that they can subrogate for your deductible as well as what they paid out . The age of the tree does n't matter , but the condition might especially if you have proof that the owner knew .
If you are renting an apartment , condo or home to live , you should have renter 's insurance . Not only will renter 's insurance cover your personal Property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but it also covers liability . Several years ago , I had a young women come into my office looking for advice on what she should do . She had been visiting her cousin , who lived in a town home . She went out on the back patio and lit a cigarette , smoked it & was sure she put it out in the dirt of a nearby planter . She and her cousin went out for dinner , only to return to the town home & the town home adjoined to be full a blaze with fire trucks putting out the fire . She was determined to be a fault . The insurance company of the adjoining home paid the claim and then subrogated -LRB- sued -RRB- her for the damages -LRB- ~ $ 105,000 -RRB- . Had she had renter 's insurance , it would have paid the claim under her liability portion of the policy . Instead , her wages were garnished and will continue to be garnished until the claim is paid in full .
It is possible that your premium may increase by making such a change , but it could be the result of any number of different factors . For example , some companies will surcharge the liability portion of their personal auto policies if a pickup or SUV is insured . The reasoning behind this is that heavier vehicles can cause more property damage and injury than can a lighter car . It is also possible that the truck is newer and has more value than your previous car and this can result in a bit higher premium for Collision and Comprehensive coverage . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specifics of your policy .
Can I borrow against my retirement plan ? With some plans , yes you can . But with this option the question becomes `` should you '' ? Loan provisions would be most common with a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- plan . While usually hardship related , the reasons have been reduced from hardship only status for some time . Trucks , cars , vacations were the norm for a while with retirement plans loans . The problem with pension loans is they take funds out of the investment pool . Sure you 're paying yourslef back , but at 5 % . What happens when those funds , left alone would have made 10 % ? Also if you leave employment for any reason , the loan balance is due immediately or it becomes a pre-mature distribution . So taxable income and a 10 % penalty . Borrowing from your pension is a last resort only choice . Never a first choice .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is Retirement Plan Distribution ?
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
Assuming youre addressing qualified retirement plans , all distributions are taxable as ordinary income to the plan participant . There is no basis in distributions . All distributions from a qualified plan are used in the provisional income test for Social Security benefit taxation . And distributions from qualified plans have required minimum distributions at age 70 .
This is a tough question . How old are you ? What is your health ? And why are you taking the money out ? If you are older than 591/2 , you can request a distribution form from your plan sponsor or employer . The form will ask whether you want to take a single distribution or a series of systematic payments . If it is not going into a Rollover IRA , the sponsor usually withholds the taxes on your behalf and you would get the net amount paid to you either in a check or an EFT . If you are YOUNGER than 591/2 , there is a 10 % excise tax that is charged -LRB- premature withdrawal -RRB- by the IRS . So if you can , try and avoid withdrawing funds prior to your retirement and do a LOAN instead . That way you are paying yourself the interest on the loaned portion of the 401K funds , and not a bank . Depending on your plan , you may also be able to take out what they call `` in service '' distributions . These allow you to transfer your funds into IRA accounts and diversify your investments for retirement . And thanks to a recent IRS change , you can even move funds from your Retirement and create a guaranteed income stream -LRB- provided by the carrier that you purchase the product from -RRB- through a Deferred Income Annuity . Think of this like buying a defined benefit with your retirement assets that you can never outlive . I hope that this answers your question .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
I have helped many people purchase substantial amount of life insurance in their retirement years . Here are some examples . One gentleman used it to maximize his pension distribution . When he retired , he took the distribution option from his pension plan that gave him the highest monthly income . However , because he chose that option , the distribution would last for his life only . It would not be passed on to his wife , should he predecease her . So , he took out life insurance to pick up the difference . When he passed away , the pension distribution stopped , but the life insurance benefit was paid so that his wife could continue to receive money . She was able to maintain her quality-of-life . Another gentleman was technically retired , but decided to start a business . He had many contacts , some ready capital , and time . Thats a good start for any entrepreneur :-RRB- Nonetheless , he did need a bank loan to jumpstart the enterprise . The bank required a life insurance policy to a indemnify the debt . So he purchased one . A couple were both retired , and heavily involved in volunteer work . There were a number of charitable organizations close to their heart . They wanted these causes to remain viable long into the future . So they purchased life insurance policies for the benefit of these charities . Yet another couple had a sizable estate . When they both passed on , Uncle Sam would come in and demand a huge amount of estate taxes to be paid . They had accumulated a number of business and personal assets , and there was no way they wanted their children to liquidate these just to pay the taxman . So they bought life insurance to take care of the tax obligation , and were able to pass on the assets intact to their heirs . I have met a number of retired couples who bought life insurance for the benefit of their adult children . Unfortunately , these children had become divorced and ended up back in the nest , at least temporarily . Once again , they had become financially dependent on their parents . Mom and Dad then took out policies to make sure that should their children tragically lose them , money would still be available to help to them get back on to their own two feet . And you thought your days of owning life insurance were over , didnt you ? :-RRB-
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
Generally speaking , a qualified retirement plan is one legislated by the government with tax advantaged features to attract American workers to save for retirement . One example is The Employee Retirement Income Security act of 1974 -LRB- ERISA -RRB- that addresses defined benefit and defined contribution plans . And one of the most popular employer sponsored defined contribution retirement plans is a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . Plan participants can make pretax contributions that accumulate tax deferred and some employers match a portion of the employee 's contribution . Of course distributions at retirement are taxed as ordinary income and there are penalties for distributions before age 591/2 .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
All qualified retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income upon withdrawals or distributions . Non-qualified annuities with gain distributed first are taxed as ordinary income . A Modified Endowment Contract life insurance policys distributions with gain distributed first are taxed as ordinary income . All of these distributions are also includable for the provisional income test for Social Security benefit taxation .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Any time that you take money out of a retirement plan , it is considered a distribution . Depending upon the tax status of the plan , a distribution will usually trigger a tax event . Although the taxation issue is complex you need to understand that when you withdraw money from your retirement plan , even if it is a guaranteed monthly income , it is likely that taxes are going to be due on some portion of the distribution . The only exception is a plan that has been organized under Roth legislation .
Distributions from qualified retirement plans are classified as oridanry income and taxed at the effective tax bracket rate of the plan participant . Distributions before age 591/2 are assessed a 10 % penalty . And in addition , required minimum distributions at age 701/2 are mandatory . Qualified plan distributions are also included in the provisional income test for taxation of Social Security .
Procrastination has economic ramifications . But saving something is better than nothing . Here 's a few thoughts that can help if you start today.You need to plan on working until you are age 70 and not taking distributions of Social Security or any qualified retirement plans you use now . Social Security distributions are maximized at age 70 and qualified plans require minimum distributions at 701/2 . So age 70 is the new retirement benchmark , especially if you 're late to the game .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
403 -LRB- b -RRB- Plan EmployerInformation - What is a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan ? Its a great benefit to both your employees and you!A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan is a tax-deferred plan that can be set up forany public school , university , college or non-profit 501 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- organization . Generally , any employee may participate as away to invest for retirement . A 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan benefits more than just your employeesIt benefits your organization . Help reward and retain loyal employees while attractingnew , well-qualified ones . Maintain a positive work environment and enhance yourreputation as a progressive , caring organization , with littlecost to you . It benefits you in your goal to prepare for yourown retirement . You will have a high-quality plan to build a supplementaryretirement income while saving on taxes today . You have the ability to choose from a wide variety ofinvestment options to fit your goals . How does a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan work ? Contributions - You and your employees can contribute money on a pre-taxbasis . This means you can afford to contribute more than ifyou put money aside after taxes were deducted . And , unlike ataxable investment , earnings on the account compound taxfree until the money is withdrawn . Then both contributionsand earnings will be treated as taxable income . A pre-taxcontribution of up to $ 17,500 may be made in 2013 . Forthose 50 and older , a catch-up contribution of $ 5,500 maybe made . Additional catch-up contributions may be madeby those with at least 15 years of service with a qualifiedemployer . These limits may increase in future years.You may be able to contribute to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan as well , and double your contributions . For example , in2013 , the maximum contribution to a 457 -LRB- b -RRB- Governmentalplan is normally $ 17,500 . That can be combined with the403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan normal contribution limit of $ 17,500 for a totalof $ 35,000 invested tax deferred . Catch-up contributions canincrease this combined limit even more . Employer match You may choose to have a plan available for just youremployees to easily contribute money for their retirement.Or , you can go a step further and offer additionalcontributions where you match all or a part of employeecontributions . The plan does not require an employer match , but its a great way to encourage participation and is apowerful tool in attracting and retaining employees . If youchoose to make matching contributions , they do not counttoward the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan limits on employee contributions . Roth option - You may choose to offer a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- option . Under aRoth option , employee contributions are made on an aftertax basis . However , a distribution from a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSAaccount is completely free of federal income tax if it meetsboth of the following requirements : It is made after the end of the five year period that beginswith the year that the employee made his or her first Roth403 -LRB- b -RRB- TSA contribution to your plan . It is made after the employee reaches age 59 , becomesdisabled or dies . Access to account balances-You can select a time period for employees to become fullyvested in the employer-matching portion of the 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan.Note that employee contributions are always 100 % vested.Distributions can be made only when participants severemployment , reach age 59 , become permanently disabledor experience financial hardship , or are a reservist called toactive duty for 180 days or more or for an indefinite period.The employer plan may impose additional restrictions . Unless the distributions are rolled over to an eligibleretirement plan , they will be taxed as ordinary income.Distributions before age 59 may also be subject to an IRS10 % penalty tax . Distributions attributable to employercontributions are only allowed on severance of employmentor occurrence of another event as provided by the plan .
First establish your time to retirement , how long until I retire ? Then create an investor profile to establish your risk tolerance . What is the beta -LRB- volatility -RRB- of the investment youre considering ? Then estimate you income tax as a percentage of your gross income . What was your gross , what do you actually pay the IRS . This helps determine if you should use a qualified plan . You should probably use a qualified plan if your employer matches your contributions . Diversification is a key component of constructing a retirement plan . Diversification in your investment portfolio . Diversification in short , midterm and long investment periods . Diversification in taxation : taxable , tax deferred and tax free . This all matters when you take distributions from your retirement plan later in life .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Best Health Insurance For Young Adults ?
The best health insurance for young persons is a policy that covers their conditions -LRB- if any -RRB- at the lowest available price . Often , that is either a `` catastrophic '' or `` Bronze '' plan . However , the `` Silver '' and `` Gold '' plans may be better options if there are expensive medications or ongoing procedures . Getting unbiased and professional help will save you hours of research and money ! There are specific plans set up for college students and persons under age 26 . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier health insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates for young adults .
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Two questions that are helpful in pointing you in the right direction to find the plan type that 's best for you are : 1 -RRB- do you want the most comprehensive coverage you can get or are you willing to take on a larger share of the risk/costs to keep your premiums down ? 2 -RRB- what is your budget ? maximum dollar you 're willing to spend ? Under the Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . You may also want to see if group coverage is available through your employer . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or youremploymentwas terminated , you lose the coverage . Anindividual plan will stay with you wherever you go . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced broker regarding your coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of products from multiple carriers and work on a personal level with our clients and help them find the coverage that will best serve their needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much !
Health insurance is important because it is the way we finance health care . Health care is expensive with office visits , lab tests , x-rays , and surgery whether inpatient or outpatient . Most people do not have money saved up for medical expenses and therefore purchase health insurance to help pay for medical care . 80 % of Americans spend less than $ 900 annually on medical care and if you are young and healthy you may not think you need health insurance . Health insurance also protects us against large and unexpected medical expenses . The large health care expenses young adults have are usually caused by outdoor activities and sports where injuries can create high medical bills . Those are the main reasons why young adults should purchase health insurance to protect against larger unexpected medical bills .
There are different views as to what the best life insurance is for children . If you have more than one minor child , getting a child rider on the parent 's policy is a very low price way of covering your children . If they develop a health condition , they will be able to convert their policy to a permanent policy of approx 5 times the value of the rider when they become an adult . If they stay healthy , they can purchase a permanent policy on their own , at a competitive price , when they become adults . Some parents prefer to purchase permanent policies for their children while they are young , and then give them that policy , all paid up , when they become adults . Either way , getting life insurance on your children ensures that they will be able to have affordable coverage as adults , in addition to providing protection if there was a tragedy while they are young .
Getting life insurance on your children is a way of ensuring that they can have life insurance when they are adults . While many health conditions are being rated more favorably by life insurance companies due to improvements in medical treatments , I also see fewer and fewer choices for young people with serious health conditions . Purchasing life insurance on your children while they are healthy is a simple and inexpensive way to give them the security of life insurance for the rest of their lives . Whether you get them Whole Life , Term insurance that they can convert to permanent insurance later on , or just put them on a child rider that they can change to 5 times that amount in permanent insurance when they become an adult , each option provides this chance to have life insurance for life even if a health condition has developed along the way .
The best health insurance for young persons is a policy that covers their conditions -LRB- if any -RRB- at the lowest available price . Often , that is either a `` catastrophic '' or `` Bronze '' plan . However , the `` Silver '' and `` Gold '' plans may be better options if there are expensive medications or ongoing procedures . Getting unbiased and professional help will save you hours of research and money ! There are specific plans set up for college students and persons under age 26 . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier health insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates for young adults .
Health insurance plans cover most routine vaccinations for children from birth through age 18 . Some of the covered vaccinations include hepatitis B , DPT -LRB- diptheria , pertussis and tetanus -RRB- , MMR -LRB- measles , mumps and rubella -RRB- . Some adult vaccinations may be covered by your health insurance plan . Those may include annual influenza shots and shingles . Also , some plans will cover the HPV vaccination for children and young adults .
I agree with Tim that one can not really say a child `` needs '' life insurance . But when they are adults , they may need life insurance to cover financial obligations , and be unable to get it because of a health condition . Getting life insurance while they are young and healthy ensures that they will have a policy when it is needed . Even just adding a small child rider to your policy will enable them to have 5 times that amount when they become an adult .
In my opinion , Whole Life for kids is a good idea if you pay up the policy before they become adults . Otherwise , hang onto the policy and keep paying the premiums yourself , or you may find that your cash strapped young adult may cash in the policy you worked so hard to procure for them .
Getting life insurance for your baby will ensure that your young adult child is able to have life insurance . You can either purchase a Whole Life policy for your baby , or else add your baby to your policy on a child rider . You can cover all children with one child rider at a very low price . If death would occur , it would pay the benefit . But also , it allows each child to convert that rider to a permanent policy when they become adults , whether or not they are able to be insured for medical reasons .
Covering a new born baby for most people does not seem natural . However , the truth is some times bad things happen and a baby can die for a number of reasons . Most people think there should be enough benefit to cover a funeral cost . But what about the emotional cost to Mom and Dad and the siblings ? We are not built to bury our children at any age , life insurance benefits allow time to grieve without financial worry . On most adult policies have a child rider that can be added for just a few dollars and will cover all of your children with guaranteed conversion as a young adult to protect their insurability . Certainly a cash value plan , like whole life insurance , as above mentioned several times is an option as well for a few more dollars . None of us know how long we have on this earth , life insurance helps the financial side of grief of your loved ones regardless of the person 's age .
The best health insurance for kids may vary , depending upon your household income and the state where you reside . Typically , a subsidized `` Silver '' , Gold or Platinum plan will provide the best benefits . CHIP and Medicaid may be available , and should be considered if you qualify . Premiums , of course , will be very low . Thanks to the passage of the `` Affordable Care Act , '' young adult and chldren 's policies are extremely affordable , and often feature premiums less than $ 50 per month , thanks to the federal subsidy . Live answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier health insurance broker since 1980 , and owner of several of the nation 's top-rated consumer websites that offer the lowest available rates .
A 2 million dollar life insurance policy will cost much different rates for men and women , young adults and seniors , smokers and nonsmokers , those with perfect health and those who have multiple health conditions . The price also varies greatly according to how long the premium is locked in . Here are some examples of the cost of a 2 million dollar life insurance policy for a 40 year old male who has perfect health . 10 year term - approx $ 50/mo 20 year term - approx $ 100/mo 30 year term - approx $ 200/mo Permanent - approx $ 800/mo You can go to a website that offers instant quotes to see what a $ 2,000,000 policy costs at other ages , genders , etc. .
The official name for `` ObamaCare '' is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- . It is also commonly referred to as Obama care , health care reform and the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- was signed into law to reform the health care industry by President Barack Obama on March 23 , 2010 and upheld by the supreme court on On June 28 , 2012 . The goal of healthcare reform is to give more Americans access to affordable , quality health insurance and to reduce the growth in health care spending in the U.S. . The fact is healthcare reform and the newly opened exchanges do not replace private insurance , Medicare , or Medicaid . If you have health coverage you like , you can keep it . Many of the ACA 's numerous provisions have already been enacted . The rest of the program starts in 2013-2014 and continues to roll out until 2022 . Healthcare reform offers a number of new benefits , rights and protections including the requirement that all new health insurance plans cover preventive services and provide new essential health benefits , this includes everything from yearly check-ups , to maternity care , to mental health , to mammograms and colonoscopies , at no out-of-pocket costs . In addition the ACA includes provisions that let young adults stay on their plan until 26 , stop insurance companies from dropping you when you are sick or if you make an honest mistake on your application , prevent against gender discrimination , stop insurance companies from making unjustified rate hikes , do away with life-time and annual limits , and require all insurers to cover people with pre-existing conditions .
According to the most recent set of complete data in 2011 , 87 % of all Kansans have some form of health insurance . Fifty-two percent have an employer-sponsored health plan , 5 % buy their own individual coverage , 13 % through Medicaid , 14 % through Medicare , and 3 % on some other form of public insurance -LRB- veterans benefits , high-risk pools , etc -RRB- . And the remaining 13 % had no health insurance at all . According to analysis of trends in KS and Nationwide , KS is one of the few states that saw a decrease in health insurance coverage -LRB- more uninsured -RRB- from 2007-2011 . Because , according to the data , the new dependent coverage meant to allow young adults to remain on their parents insurance up to age 27 , did n't impact Kansas Residents as much as the rest of the nation during the recession .
That depends on what your life insurance needs are . If you are a young working adult , consider term insurance . You can get more insurance coverage for less money . If you are older , have health issues or are a low income earner , consider final expense insurance . These are smaller whole life insurance policies that are specifically designed to just cover funeral arrangements , burial plots , caskets , etc. . Final expense insurance is more expensive than term , yet still affordable in most cases .
There are still too many variables to provide you a definitive answer . The state or states your workforce is located in , the size of your small business -LRB- less than 50 or greater than 50 employees ? -RRB- , the ages of your employees/spouses/dependent children to be covered , the number of dependent children to be covered , perhaps tobacco usage , plus factors such as health plan design all vary from group to group but are critical features defining fully insured health insurance rates in ObamaCare compliant plan designs . Speaking in very generic terms based upon marketplace quoting as of July 2014 , I would estimate unit cost ranges for small group plans -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- on a composite rated basis to generally fall within the following ranges : Employee Only : $ 250 to $ 425 Median : $ 325 Spousal Unit : $ 280 to $ 500 Median : $ 395 Per Child Unit -LRB- 3 max -RRB- $ 85 to $ 175Median : $ 120 -LRB- Note : dependent children age 21 to 26 charged separate young adult rate -RRB- This is based onno exhaustive analysis , just from what I have seen and gathered from my peers here in the mid-south . If someone were to give me the vague `` what would health insurance costs be for my small business '' questionto dosome business cost projections these would be reasonable ranges to expect to work within and approximate average costs per covered unit to experience at this time .
The two other reasons would be `` garanteeing '' their insurability and for efficient acumulation of funds . Many people purchase `` umping juvinile '' policies on their young children to lock in a low rate and to garantee that the child has life insurance , that serious health conditions can prevent a child/young adult from obtaining life insurance once such a health issue is diagnosed , purchacing a policy before the diagnosis will `` lock '' in the policy no matter what happens . Then the child reaches a prescribed age , generally 21 , the face of the policy is increased automatically without the imposition of either an additional premium charge or a medical examination . The other reason for purchasing life insurance on one 's baby would be for a college funding vehicle . The three most popular college funding vehicles are 529 -LRB- c -RRB- accounts , Coverdell education savings accounts and Equity Indexed Universal Life policies . However one must structure the EIUL policy accordingly so that it effeciently accumulates excess cash value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
When it comes to insuring your children , there is no magic number . You could insure them for as little as what you believe a funeral would cost , or you could insure them for a substantially higher amount . Most parents do n't want to think about profiting financially from the unfortunate death of a child , but buying life insurance on children while they are young could give the child the guarantee of having life insurance as an adult .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Does My Life Insurance Send Me A Letter Every Year Saying The Policy Expires In 2 Years ?
It is impossible to ascertain what is going on without seeing your original policy and the letters you are getting every two years , but it sounds like you may have purchased a Universal Life policy . The maturity date may have been based on current interest rate and cost of insurance -LRB- COI -RRB- , then either the interest rate went down , or the COI went up , or both . If that is the case , then you may need to increase your premium in order for your policy to be paid up in 25 years . In fact , if you are getting letters saying it is going to expire soon , you may need to increase the premium just to keep it in effect . If you ask them for a current policy illustration , that will show you how long your policy is guaranteed to last with your current premium . It may be that you just need to pay a little extra one month to get your policy back on track . If it truly does need a large infusion of premium to keep it in effect , you will need to determine whether that is worth it . If your husband has excellent health , he may be able to find a permanent policy that is guaranteed not to lapse until the end of his life , without paying a lot more than what he is paying now . If his health has declined , and there are some guarantees in his current policy , it may work out best to just adjust what you have .
Graded death benefit whole life insurance is permanent coverage that features an alternative structure in the first 2 or 3 years of the policy -LRB- depending on the insurance company -RRB- . The program will feature one of two graded benefit methods . 1 -RRB- Return of premium - if death occurs during the graded period , any premiums paid into the policy is given to the beneficiary . If death occurs under accidental means , then the full benefit is still payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs due to illness or injury . Some carriers may offer interest on your premiums if the insured passes away during the graded period - be sure to review your policy to see if it 's under your policy . The return of premium structure is more commonly seen under graded benefit whole life policies . 2 -RRB- Reduced death benefit - if death occurs during the graded period , the coverage will payout a specific percentage of the death benefit , depending on which year during the graded period death occurs . For example , if death occurs during the first year of the policy , the carrier only pays 30 % or 35 % of the death benefit -LRB- depending on the carrier -RRB- - 70 % or 75 % if death occurs during year 2 . If death occurs under accidental means during the graded period , then the full benefit is payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under final expense policies -LRB- another name for small whole life policies with face amounts of $ 25,000 or less -RRB- , the responses to the health questions determine whether you will qualify for a level benefit -LRB- immediate full coverage -RRB- or a graded benefit . Typically , to qualify for a level benefit , all the health questions have to be answered no . Please note , just because you may not be able to answer all health questions no for one carrier 's program , does n't mean you would n't be able to answer no to all questions for a different carrier . Each insurance company has their own questions that they ask so one carrier may be able to consider a level benefit where another may not . The wording to the questions is critical to pay attention to . If you ca n't qualify for traditional final expense coverage , you always have the option for GUARANTEED ISSUE whole life . These programs do not ask any health questions whatsoever . They will feature the return of premium graded period . When buying any whole life insurance policy , be sure to remember 2 things : 1 -RRB- Do the premiums remain the same for the entire life of the policy ? - Some policies feature banded premium - meaning they go up every 5 years . They may be cheaper up front during the first couple years , but can cost significantly more over the long run . 2 -RRB- What age does the coverage carry you to ? - Some policies will only carry you to age 80 or to age 90 - and if you live beyond that age , your policy automatically terminates . It 's best to set yourself up with something that guarantees the coverage will remain in place for life -LRB- as long as you continue to pay your premiums of course -RRB- . I always suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare multiple insurance policies with your medical history to make sure you 're getting the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost . There is no cost to doing so . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
It is impossible to ascertain what is going on without seeing your original policy and the letters you are getting every two years , but it sounds like you may have purchased a Universal Life policy . The maturity date may have been based on current interest rate and cost of insurance -LRB- COI -RRB- , then either the interest rate went down , or the COI went up , or both . If that is the case , then you may need to increase your premium in order for your policy to be paid up in 25 years . In fact , if you are getting letters saying it is going to expire soon , you may need to increase the premium just to keep it in effect . If you ask them for a current policy illustration , that will show you how long your policy is guaranteed to last with your current premium . It may be that you just need to pay a little extra one month to get your policy back on track . If it truly does need a large infusion of premium to keep it in effect , you will need to determine whether that is worth it . If your husband has excellent health , he may be able to find a permanent policy that is guaranteed not to lapse until the end of his life , without paying a lot more than what he is paying now . If his health has declined , and there are some guarantees in his current policy , it may work out best to just adjust what you have .
If you are currently being treated for cancer , you will not be able to qualify for any term life insurance . Carriers will only consider coverage after the completion of your cancer treatment . From there , most carriers will have a postponement period of at least 2 years -LRB- most prefer 4-5 years -RRB- from the point the cancer treatment was completed . If you apply for term insurance after this window and can qualify for it , you will likely be assigned a table-rating for your coverage -LRB- a table-rating is a percentage increase in premium on the standard risk classification - you can be rated table 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , or 8 . Some carriers will offer table ratings up to table 10 or 12 , but few do . Table ratings can also be cited as letters - table A , B , C , D , E , F , G , H , etc. -RRB- . The more time that has passed since the cancer episode , the better risk class you can qualify for because there is a less likelihood of a reoccurrence of the cancer . During this period , the only life insurance coverage you would be able to secure is Guaranteed Issue Whole Life insurance . These are final expense policies that feature face amounts of $ 25,000 or less and have a graded benefit period . A graded benefit period is a 2-3 year window -LRB- depends on the carrier - most are 2 years -RRB- where if death occurs during the graded period , the carrier pays only the premiums that were paid into the policy -LRB- unless the death occurred under accidental means - when this happens , the full benefit is payable -RRB- . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of cause of death . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is probably a situation where you will want to get some legal advice . I have seen cases explained where it went both ways . The answer to your general question , however , is that the policy does not actually go into effect until the first payment is made and required delivery paperwork is received . What happens so often during life insurance underwriting is that you are not speaking with the person who makes the ultimate decisions . The fact that they told you to send in the first payment sounds like a good move on their part , so that base would at least be covered . But the legalities have to then go by their teams who make those complicated decisions . And far too often , auto generated memos go out without taking into account the whole situation . I say this not as an excuse for insurance companies , but just because we run into this a lot , where their letters have not caught up with current reality . If they had said your husband 's policy was in effect on the day of his death , I think you would have a strong case . But with it being an approval letter , and then how it went down afterwards , I could not say . It certainly can not hurt to ask a legal expert who can advise you , though . Best wishes and my condolences at this difficult time .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Traditionally , you can get up to 20-30x your income level of life insurance . The medical history does not necessarily limit how much you can get . The medical history determines the risk classification which controls the premiums for the coverage you want to put in place . When it comes to breast cancer , the details of the medical condition will determine which carriers will offer coverage and what the risk classification would be -LRB- each carrier has different underwriting , you may not get the same risk class offer from each of them -RRB- , The best thing to do is to shop the case via an independent insurance agent/broker who can shop it to multiple companies . You do NOT want to apply to multiple companies as this can work against you due to the MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- - from a company 's point of view , it 's sort of like a red flag if you will if they saw you applied to multiple companies which they can check the MIB for . In order to secure the most accurate quotes for the coverage , a number of factors would need to be known such as when the cancer was diagnosed , what stage is it in/was it in , how was it treated , has treatment been completed , are there anymore tests scheduled or that need to be completed , are you being treated for any other conditions , what prescriptions do you take , family medical history , and other factors . If you have a copy of the pathology report , that will help with a lot of the input . If cancer is current , guaranteed-issue whole life -LRB- GIWL -RRB- will be the only type of coverage available as it does n't have any medical questions or exam requirements . However , the amount of coverage available under a single policy is $ 20,000 - $ 25,000 , depending on the carrier . To get more than that , you would need to stack multiple policies . Under GIWL policies , they traditionally feature a 2 or 3 year graded period - meaning you only have accidental death coverage during those periods , otherwise the carrier just returns the premiums paid into the policy if death occurs during the graded period . After the graded period expires , the full benefit is payable . Carriers typically only issue fully-underwritten coverage if the cancer has been in remission/treatment completed for at least 2 years . Many carriers prefer 5 + years from the date treatment was completed for a more favorable risk class . Send me a message via the `` contact me '' button by my profile picture if you would like me to assist with your coverage . My group is licensed with about 50 different carriers in numerous states . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know how I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A columnist for Fool.com , Morgan Housel , just wrote a terrific article on this topic titled , An Open Letter to Everyone Under Age 30 . He describes why the best estimate for what stocks will return over many decades is 6.6 % per year , and then goes on to put some real numbers to what 6.6 % growth means : Every dollar saved by a 20 year old for the 45 years until retirement will grow to be worth $ 18.50 . Since a 30 year old only has 35 years until retirement , each dollar saved will only be worth about $ 9.60 . As Housel says , `` Saving a little bit of money when you are young can be a more efficient way to build wealth than saving a lot when you 're older . ''
Yes ! Humana does offer Medigap plans . Of the 11 different plans in the marketplace , Humana offers Medigap plans A , B , C , F , G , K , L , N , and High-deductible F - please note , not every medigap plan may be available and may not be sold in every area . Medigap plans are the same from every company because they 're standardized by the government . The only difference between the coverage from each carrier is the price they charge for it . Price quotes are determined by the quoted plan -LRB- s -RRB- , your age , zip code , any tobacco usage , and marital status -LRB- some carriers offer rate discounts if married and if spouses applying together -RRB- . It 's important to compare the rates from every available option in your area -LRB- including Humana and every other insurer offering Medigap plans in your zip code -RRB- so you can secure your desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . If you need quotes for Humana 's Medigap plans -LRB- as well as those from other carriers to compare to as well -RRB- , please give me a call at 888-972-0024 - that connects to my office directly -LRB- not an automated system -RRB- . You can also send me an e-mail by clicking on the `` contact me '' button next to my name . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
Thanks very much for your question . In addition to your age , health statuses , and non-smoking statuses , I would need to know your zip code to run the quotes for you . The rates will vary quite a bit depending on where in the country you 're located -LRB- as well as which Medigap plan is desired - the most popular being plans F & G -RRB- . For non-smokers , plans F and G can genearlly range from as low as $ 75 per month to over $ 150 per month depending Medigap plan letter , your zip code , male vs. female , and ages . If you 're a husband and wife applying together , you can also get a household discount of up to 12 % -LRB- again , depending on where you live and the carrier the coverage is through -RRB- when you apply together - different insurance companies feature different discount structures . Please send me an e-mail via the contact me button or call me at 703-665-9133 to go over the quotes directly . I do n't charge any fees for my services and there is no extra cost in premium to purchase coverage through an independent agent vs. going to the carrier directly . I 'm licensed with multiple insurance companies in a number of states and can compare each of them for you at the same time instantly . I hope my information is helpful . Thanks very much for your question .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
The mortality rate increases every year . That means for every year you survive , your chances of not surviving the next year are greater . If you purchased one year term insurance the price will increase every year . When you buy a ten or twenty year term policy , the premium charged for those years is level but is roughly the average you would have paid for the one year term policies . The shock is to look at the one year term rate after your guaranteed premium period expires . It can be multiples of your guaranteed premiums , and it increases every year .
When the guarantee period on a term life insurance policy expires , you have several choices you can make : 1 -RRB- You can continue your coverage , however , the policy becomes annually renewable and the premiums increase each year by a substantial margin -LRB- based on age -RRB- . 2 -RRB- You can terminate the policy and end the coverage . 3 -RRB- You can stop paying premiums and allow the policy to lapse on its own . 4 -RRB- If you still need coverage , work with an independent insurance broker to secure a new policy with a new guarantee period -LRB- either for a set term period or guarantee the policy for life -RRB- - you want to do this before the existing policy 's guarantee period expires . Keep in mind , underwriting can take up to 6-8 weeks to complete so you want to allow enough time to get a new policy in place . # 4 is the course of action most people generally take as you will generally need some level of coverage for the rest of your life , whether it 's to cover a mortgage , income replacement , final expenses , etc. . Send me a private message on here if you would like assistance with your coverage .
Auto policies normally do not provide a grace period . When the policy is not renewed coverage ceases on the expiration date . Normally the company will issue a letter advising you of the date that coverage will cease . If that date is past you expiration date , you are responsible to pay the premium for that period of time , even if you chose to not renew the policy . The company may extend a period of time for you to reinstate coverage , but a cancellation letter is probably being sent at the same time .
It can be . If the policy being surrendered is a permanent life insurance policy with cash value , theinterest that has built up can be taxable . When this happens , the carrier would send you a letter noting the taxable amount . Talk to your agent before cashing in a life insurance policy . There may be other reasons why you should keep it going or alternatives that are more suitable for your situation . Once you have surrendered the policy , you ca n't undo it .
You can cancel homeowners insurance at any time . Call your insurance company or agent and tell them that you want to cancel coverage . They will issue an amended declaration that will show that all coverage ceased on the date that you called . They will send you a bill for any premium that is still due or a refund of any premium not used . They will send the same declaration to your mortgage company who will then start writing letters to you and will ultimately force issue a policy to cover their interests and send you the invoice for the premium , normally as a part of your mortgage bill .
Term life insurance policies technically do n't expire until age 90 or 95 -LRB- with most carriers -RRB- . However , most people only keep a term life insurance policy until the term premium guarantee period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 20 year term policy , you 're likely only going to carry it until the end of that 20 year period -RRB- . When the term premium guarantee period expires , the policy structure will do one of two things : 1 -RRB- the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- by substantial margins , or 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same and the death benefit will decrease each year . Many people often review their term insurance policies well before the term period expires because they may want to replace the policy with a new one to create a new term period to secure low rates while they 're young and healthy or change the amount of coverage they need to reduce their premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your term insurance coverage , including quotes and policy analysis and comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can go about securing coverage in one of two ways for this type of medical history . A route with no medical questions would be issued under a guaranteed-issue , graded benefit whole life insurance policy -LRB- 2-year waiting period for full coverage to start - accident only coverage in years 1 and 2 -RRB- . The maximum amount of coverage you can secure under one of these programs is between $ 20,000 - $ 25,000 . Please note , most guaranteed-issue life insurance policy have a minimum age requirement of 45 or 50 years old and a maximum age allowance of 80 or 85 years old . The 2nd route is going to be the most advantageous If you 're looking for more coverage than that , but you would need to go through full underwriting . These programs would allow you to secure full coverage from day 1 of the policy -LRB- no waiting period under a graded benefit -RRB- . The specific details regarding the stroke history -LRB- e.g. was there any paralysis and where , were there any lingering effects , are you still taking medications to treat lingering effects as a result of the stroke , etc. -RRB- as well as the diabetes history . For the diabetes history , the most recent A1C reading , when was it diagnosed , how is it being treated , etc. will affect the risk classification a carrier can/will offer -LRB- this determines the rates -LRB- cost -RRB- for the coverage , if approved -RRB- . You will need to shop the case among multiple companies to see which carriers can consider coverage at what risk class . Every company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may be able to work with the medical history where others may not - for this , I highly recommend shopping the case first before applying for ANY coverage because throwing mud against the wall to see what sticks -LRB- applying to multiple companies -RRB- can work against you as it can become a red flag to insurance companies when they see declines in the MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- records . An independent insurance broker such as myself can do this for you . My group is licensed in over 35 states and with over 50 insurance companies and we charge no fees to our clients for our services . We can help you with the entire process from start to finish . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , please send me a message and we will help you shop the case so you can secure the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost - my contact information is provided on my profile . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much for your question .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Exactly Does Graded Whole Life Insurance Mean ?
Great question . These are the questions that should be asked before signing up for a policy . A graded policy normally will not pay out full benefits within a certain amount of time -LRB- such as 2 years -RRB- if death occurs from natural causes . So if a person were to have a graded policy and dies within the 1st year , more than likely the beneficiary will get just the premiums that were paid in that year plus maybe another 10 % or so as an example .
Graded death benefit whole life insurance is permanent coverage that features an alternative structure in the first 2 or 3 years of the policy -LRB- depending on the insurance company -RRB- . The program will feature one of two graded benefit methods . 1 -RRB- Return of premium - if death occurs during the graded period , any premiums paid into the policy is given to the beneficiary . If death occurs under accidental means , then the full benefit is still payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs due to illness or injury . Some carriers may offer interest on your premiums if the insured passes away during the graded period - be sure to review your policy to see if it 's under your policy . The return of premium structure is more commonly seen under graded benefit whole life policies . 2 -RRB- Reduced death benefit - if death occurs during the graded period , the coverage will payout a specific percentage of the death benefit , depending on which year during the graded period death occurs . For example , if death occurs during the first year of the policy , the carrier only pays 30 % or 35 % of the death benefit -LRB- depending on the carrier -RRB- - 70 % or 75 % if death occurs during year 2 . If death occurs under accidental means during the graded period , then the full benefit is payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under final expense policies -LRB- another name for small whole life policies with face amounts of $ 25,000 or less -RRB- , the responses to the health questions determine whether you will qualify for a level benefit -LRB- immediate full coverage -RRB- or a graded benefit . Typically , to qualify for a level benefit , all the health questions have to be answered no . Please note , just because you may not be able to answer all health questions no for one carrier 's program , does n't mean you would n't be able to answer no to all questions for a different carrier . Each insurance company has their own questions that they ask so one carrier may be able to consider a level benefit where another may not . The wording to the questions is critical to pay attention to . If you ca n't qualify for traditional final expense coverage , you always have the option for GUARANTEED ISSUE whole life . These programs do not ask any health questions whatsoever . They will feature the return of premium graded period . When buying any whole life insurance policy , be sure to remember 2 things : 1 -RRB- Do the premiums remain the same for the entire life of the policy ? - Some policies feature banded premium - meaning they go up every 5 years . They may be cheaper up front during the first couple years , but can cost significantly more over the long run . 2 -RRB- What age does the coverage carry you to ? - Some policies will only carry you to age 80 or to age 90 - and if you live beyond that age , your policy automatically terminates . It 's best to set yourself up with something that guarantees the coverage will remain in place for life -LRB- as long as you continue to pay your premiums of course -RRB- . I always suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare multiple insurance policies with your medical history to make sure you 're getting the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost . There is no cost to doing so . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Graded Benefit Whole Life Insurance is whole life insurance that pays a reduced benefit during the first one to three years , then pays the full death benefit after that . E.g. . If death occurred during year one or two , it may pay back all you paid in , plus 10 % . If death occurred during year three or afterwards , it would pay the beneficiary the whole death benefit . Different policies are graded a different number of years , and each carrier has their own criteria for how much is paid back during the graded years . Most graded benefit whole life policies are only graded for natural death . I.e. death due to illness or old age . They usually pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for accidental death . Guaranteed issue whole life policies are graded , and some simplified issue policies are graded . Simplified issue policies are those that do not require an exam . The biggest thing to watch out for with graded whole life insurance is whether the premium stays level for life . Some graded whole life policies have premiums that go up at regular intervals . With some , the company may raise the premiums at any time , as long as they do so for everyone owning that type of policy . If you anticipate living longer than a few years , it is best to buy a graded benefit whole life policy where the premium will stay level for the rest of your life . Please feel free to contact me at any time if you would like to see whether you qualify for an immediate benefit policy , or to get some competitive quotes for several graded benefit policies that have the price locked in for life .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
Graded life insurance means that the death benefit is graded ... `` gradually passes from one level to another '' , per the dictionary . The death benefit is not paid to the beneficiary 100 % in year one , except for accidental death . For death due to natural causes -LRB- illness -RRB- , it pays a portion of the death benefit in year one , then another portion in year two , and so on . Most policies are graded two years , but some are graded three years . Graded life insurance allows people who have a hard time getting regular life insurance to be able to get something , rather than go without .
No , being wheelchair bound is not a reason for a life insurance application to be automatically declined . However having cerebral palsy will have a significant impact on his insurability , as well as the type of policy and company that will be best for him . With many companies you can submit what is called a trial application . This simply means that the company will obtain his medical records -LRB- with his consent of course -RRB- and determine exactly what rate class he qualifies for before discussing policy specifics . With any life insurance application , the rate quoted is not guaranteed until the underwriting process is finished . By completing the underwriting first his agent will know exactly what he qualifies for and exactly what the premium will be . Your son wo n't potentially waste a lot of time discussing what the agent thinks the rate will be , he will know for sure .
The best life insurance plans are different for different people , because no two people have exactly the same financial scenario or personal details . One 40 year old male may own a home , be raising three teenagers soon to go to college , and have no health problems . He is certainly going to want a large policy to cover his family if he should pass away , and to be able to afford that much , he is probably going to want to take it in term insurance . Another 40 year old male may have finished treatments for stage 4 colon cancer a year ago . The policy he gets it going to be much smaller , will probably be whole life , and will be graded for at least two years . While the best plan for his family would be more like what the first man got , the best plan for him , in reality , will be one he can get . He can then replace it with one that has a larger face amount after his cancer has been in remission for a number of years . PS The ironic thing is , most people who can get the best plans for everyone , put it off until they can no longer get them .
Graded benefit whole life insurance pays out a reduced death benefit during the first 1-3 years that you have the life insurance policy , for death due to illness or old age . Sometimes the death benefit starts out very low in year one , then goes up a bit in year two , and so on until the policy pays 100 % . Thus , the title , `` graded '' . Most graded life insurance policies will pay out 100 % from day one for accidental death . Graded life insurance pays back more than you paid in during the first graded years of the policy , and more than you would be able to get from a savings account . So certainly has its place for those who are unable to get a policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason .
Of course , you can go anywhere without health insurance . The question is `` What will they do with you when you show up in their ER ? '' If you arrive with a serious injury or presenting symptoms of a serious injury or medical event -LRB- like a heart attack -RRB- they are required to treat you . Showing up at the emergency room for a medical issue that is minor in nature and should be handled by a primary care physician , dentist or urgent/minor care center is another matter entirely and is one of the biggest problems and wastes of resources faced by ER departments . Any ER is going to engage in triage -LRB- determining who has the most serious problem and requires immediate attention versus persons with less pressing needs -RRB- and may direct you away or tell you to be prepared for a very long wait if your issue is minor . Your low grade fever and congestion may feel like an emergency to you but it pales in comparison to the person suffering from multiple traumas from an auto accident that is being wheeled in . In any event , the most expensive medical care you will ever receive is in the hospital 's emergency room . Yes , you can go without health insurance and in a situation of real need that is exactly what you should do . Just be prepared for a big bill when you do .
If you are currently being treated for cancer , you will not be able to qualify for any term life insurance . Carriers will only consider coverage after the completion of your cancer treatment . From there , most carriers will have a postponement period of at least 2 years -LRB- most prefer 4-5 years -RRB- from the point the cancer treatment was completed . If you apply for term insurance after this window and can qualify for it , you will likely be assigned a table-rating for your coverage -LRB- a table-rating is a percentage increase in premium on the standard risk classification - you can be rated table 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , or 8 . Some carriers will offer table ratings up to table 10 or 12 , but few do . Table ratings can also be cited as letters - table A , B , C , D , E , F , G , H , etc. -RRB- . The more time that has passed since the cancer episode , the better risk class you can qualify for because there is a less likelihood of a reoccurrence of the cancer . During this period , the only life insurance coverage you would be able to secure is Guaranteed Issue Whole Life insurance . These are final expense policies that feature face amounts of $ 25,000 or less and have a graded benefit period . A graded benefit period is a 2-3 year window -LRB- depends on the carrier - most are 2 years -RRB- where if death occurs during the graded period , the carrier pays only the premiums that were paid into the policy -LRB- unless the death occurred under accidental means - when this happens , the full benefit is payable -RRB- . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of cause of death . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No . Insurance companies typically will not issue a life insurance policy to anyone who is incarcerated at the time of the application . Please note , some may think that a `` guaranteed issue '' policy could be issued , however , these types of policies are cited as guaranteed issue in reference to a person 's medical history not being a factor in the underwriting process . Guaranteed issue policies also featurea 2 or 3 year `` graded '' period on the policy . A graded period means if death occurs in the first two years of the policy , then the carrier returns the premiums paid into the policy -LRB- unless death occurs under accidental means , then the full face amount is paid out -RRB- . If death occurs after the graded period has expired , then the full death benefit is paid out .
Everything mentioned above is correct . You need to also consider when selecting Life Insurance for somebody that 's older the underwriting process you 'll have to go through . Depending on the benefit amount , some companies have a nonmedical underwriting process . That means mom and dad do n't have to give a blood or urine sample . You 'll see these type of plans on TV . Yet be aware of what you 're buying . Most of the TV Brands do not have guaranteed level premiums for life , or the death benefit is n't paid in full for the first two years . Allow me to explain in more detail . These plans are often called final expense Life Insurance . Generally speaking there or two ways the benefits are paid out . If your parents or in overall good health , without a major event like a heart attack or cancer in the last two years , they should be eligible for what 's called an immediate benefit . Once the policies approved the death benefit is available the next day . The other type is called a graded benefit -LRB- or call date modified benefit in some cases -RRB- . Again , generally speaking , most of these plans have a limited payout the first two years of policy is in force . Some pay a percentage of the death benefit while others refund all your premiums plus an interest rate . These plans are great if mom and dad are in poor health . Some applications have zero medical questions . I often see where someone is sold a graded benefit when they could have received a level benefit with a different carrier . Underwriting is the key factor ! If your parents are in good health they may want to consider a fully underwritten policy . That typically includes a small medical exam . Think of it this way , the deeper the carrier looks into somebody 's health , the better their rate for the same benefit will be . Then there 's the whole question of what type of insurance to get . Whole Life -LRB- which is what the Final expense plans are -RRB- , Term , or Universal Life . The Orman 's and Ramsey 's of the world will tell you to buy nothing else than term . . ever , ever , ever ... . I 'm not going to debate that now . Just going to say they are hurting a lot of people with such narrow , cookie cutter advice . ALL life insurance types have a time & place . If you have further questions ... Reach out . Honored to help ... - gravy .
Life insurance that is guaranteed issue means that the person applying for it can not be declined due to life insurance or other risk . However , there are usually strict age guidelines for guaranteed issue life insurance , with the minimum age usually age 40-50 and the maximum age usually under age 80 . Also , the policy is graded during the first one to three years , meaning that it will pay a portion of the death benefit -LRB- or pay back what was paid in plus a little extra -RRB- during those years for death due to natural causes . After the graded period is over , it generally pays 100 % for death by any reason .
It 's generally who is offering it to you at the lowest cost . The benefits of a given Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan are EXACTLY the same from every company . This means that if you 're looking at a plan F from United Healthcare and a plan F from CareFirst , the coverage under the plan is identical . The main ways carriers differentiate themselves is through their premiums , their rating method for the premiums , and any value added services . Carriers can use 1 of 3 rating methods : 1 -RRB- Attained-age rated - this is the most common rating method used . It means your rates increase as you get older each year . 2 -RRB- Community rated - this is used by United Healthcare -LRB- I do n't know of any other carriers that use this method -RRB- . This means your rates do not increase based on your age . Everyone in a given area pays the same rates - e.g. a 85 year old and a 75 year old pay exactly the same thing . 3 -RRB- Issue-age rated - this is used only by a couple of companies . This means your rates are based on your age at the time the policy was first issued . While this seems great , it 's often featured as the most expensive Medigap plans . Value added services are things like dental and vision discounts -LRB- not dental and vision insurance , just discounts for services -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Graded Benefit Whole Life Insurance is permanent life insurance that does not pay out the full death benefit for natural death until you have had the policy for a while . The average graded period is two years . During this time it may pay a percent of the death benefit for death due to natural causes such as illness , or it may return all you paid in plus a little extra . After 1 to 4 years , a graded policy will pay 100 % of the death benefit . They usually also pay 100 % from day one for accidental death .
Yes , life insurance does pay for natural death -LRB- death due to natural causes such as illness or old age -RRB- . Accidental death insurance does not pay for natural death . Graded life insurance policies will pay a reduced amount for the first 1-3 years for natural death , depending on the features of the policy . After the graded period has passed , graded policies will also pay 100 % for death due to any reason , including natural death .
Graded Benefit Whole Life Insurance is an increasing stepped up premium that as a level death benefit in guaranteed issue policies . It also can be a participating graded premium whole life policy that starts out with a gradual step up in premium and then levels our on the future . Participating whole life products use declared dividends to pay premium or limit the payments if the dividend is large enough .
Graded whole life policies are designed to allow a person who would otherwise be turned for traditional whole life insurance due to existising health conditions to purchase a whole life policy . They are usually offered and purchased as a small final expense policy . Because the policy is graded you wo n't receive full benefits for the first couple years . Benefits are limited to the premiums paid in plus and interest factor that is determined by the insurance company and this can vary depending on the insurance provider . Once a policy holder is past the first two to three years full benefits would be paid to the beneficiary .
A graded whole-Life insurance policy is intended for people in pretty bad health who ca n't qualify for a full benefit policy . If you have a graded policy for $ 10,000 and died during the first 12-months , it would usually pay only 30 % of the death benefit or $ 3,000 If you died during month 13-24 it would usually pay 70 % or $ 7,000 After 24-months it would pay the full $ 10,000 Before you sign up for a graded benefit policy , make certain that you have a very experienced agent review your options . Many people sign up for a graded policy after one or two companies turn them down for full benefit . An experienced agent can check your health against dozens of companies and often get you approved at full benefit and a lower premium .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Does Home Insurance Cost Per Month In West Virginia ?
According to Home Insurance LLC , the average annual home owners insurance premium in West Virginia is $ 875 . Please keep in mind that his average assumes that you live in an average priced home with average risk factors . Additional assessment of your specific home and risk factors may increase or decrease your annual premium .
The cost of life insurance in West Virginia is usually the same as in the rest of the United States . To get an actual quote for life insurance policies for residents of West Virginia , you can visit a website that offers instant quotes and input different ages , face amounts and term lengths . However , these quotes are for the healthiest people ; the cost of life insurance for persons with health problems can be much higher . Calling the website or a local agency is the best way to find out the cost of life insurance in West Virginia for you .
Agree with everything Ed said . In addition to liability coverage , West Virginia also has a rather strange uninsured motorist coverage requirement ... . In most states , uninsured motorist and under-insured motorist are both either required , or they are not . In West Virginia , uninsured motorist coverage is required , but under-insured motorist coverage is optional . WV requires the same coverage for uninsured motorist as they do liability : 20K per person , 40K per occurrence for uninsured motorist bodily injury and 10K of uninsured motorist property damage .
Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield is one of the oldest and strongest health insurance companies - Anthem products are available for sale in a number of areas . Owned as part of the Wellpoint group . In Virginia , Anthem is available in all areas west of Route 123/Chain Bridge Road . Anthem has one of the largest provider networks in the state of Virginia and allows access to the Blue Cross/Blue Shield network nationwide , so you dont have to worry about your coverage when you travel . The network includes over 94 million members and has in-network benefits at nearly 90 % of physicians and 80 % of hospitals nationwide . The network re-pricing discounts just for being a member average more than 48 % per claim , saving you money even when you havent met your chosen deductible . Anthem 's new plans under the affordable care act are the HealthKeepers plans -LRB- bronze , silver , and gold plans - Anthem BCBS does not offer catastrophic or platinum level plans -RRB- . These new plans feature more comprehensive benefits than before and include a range of deductible options to suit everyone 's budgets and no charge for preventative care . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The minimum liability requirements for car insurance in West Virginia is $ 20,000 per person , $ 40,000 per occurrence and an additional $ 10,000 for property damage . Although you are `` legal '' when you have these coverages , you should always consider increasing the amounts , if it is affordable . Like most states , you are also required to carry proof of insurance in your vehicle at all times . All of the major carriers offer minimum limits . To properly compare the best auto insurance prices in West Virginia , utilize an experienced broker -LRB- and their website -RRB- to easily view the companies that have the most affordable options in your area . You are never charged any fees for shopping and comparing .
Your questions refers to `` different provinces , '' but I would supposed you mean `` different states '' except you reside outside the United States of America . Now back to your question , Auto Insurance Rates are influenced by several factors in different states or localities . Among them is claims experience in that state or locality . If you are a single male aged 20 and live in lets say New York city and lets say 500,000 vehicles were involved in some sort of collision , theft or vandalism in 2014 and your college friend lives in some city in West Virginia where all you see is farm land and few cars . Total number of vehicles involved in any collision , theft or vandalism are 500 in 2014 . Then question that is posed is what is the probability of your vehicle being in a collision in West Virginia ? The answer is very low and as a result you pay low premium as compared to your friend who lives in New York . Insurance is all about probability .
Medicare Region C includes the states Alabama , Arkansas , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , Louisiana , Mississippi , New Mexico , North Carolina , Oklahoma , South Carolina , Tennessee , Texas , Virginia , West Virginia , Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands . This and other regions are designated for the purpose of supplying Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- for Medicare .
Life insurance proceeds are taxable if they are left to the estate of the policy owner . However , if the beneficiary is a person , that person receives the life insurance benefit income tax free . If they decide to take it on payments , only the interest is taxed . Federal estate taxes will be charged if the estate -LRB- including life insurance proceeds -RRB- exceeds $ 5,250,000 in 2013 . West Virginia does not have a state estate tax .
I am puzzled by your statement `` one can not damage their own property and submit a claim '' . What happens then if someone runs a stop sign or a red light and hits another car and the guilty party is charged with failure to yield right of way '' . This scenario probably happens once a day in every state and I was unaware that West Virginia has such out of touch insurance laws . I thought the driver could have his company , subject to the deductible , repair his car . The real question in your scenario is the school district best advised to file a claim because their Commercial policy is going to have to pay the claim on both sides of the equation , Also , the driver of the bus has no legal standing because he is driving the school district bus with the permission of the school district but the school district has the right to file or not to file
According to Home Insurance LLC , the average annual home owners insurance premium in West Virginia is $ 875 . Please keep in mind that his average assumes that you live in an average priced home with average risk factors . Additional assessment of your specific home and risk factors may increase or decrease your annual premium .
Everyone wants to pay less for car insurance butbe careful purchasingthe cheapest policy . Purchasing the cheapest policy onlinemay cost you severly down the road . For example , a home owner in Virginia recentlypurchased a policy online with state minmium limits . The policy was $ 15 less per month so he decided to switch . Two months later he was hit by an uninsured driver and in the hospital for 3 months . The new policy he purchased did not cover his car much less his medical bills . Cheaper is notbetter sowhen it comes to insurance focus on finding the best value .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There are several different reasons home insurance rates increase . Most carriers would probably tell you that at least a portion of their increases are linked to weather/natural disaster related claims increases over the past few years . I often hear from clients in Wisconsin -LRB- our location -RRB- thinking they should not have to pay more for insurance due to the carrier having more lossesfrom fires out west , or hurricanes on the coast.Clients say they did not have a claim so why should they pay more?This debate will rage on but I doubt much will change . Insurance carriers are a business and when they pay out more in claims , due to bad weather or what have you , they have to make up for the difference ; increasing premiums . They spread risk around to remain competetive , trying to balance out higher risk states/locationswith lower risk states/locations . Average premiums on a state to state level often reflect this -LRB- for example , Florida is often ranked number one for premium cost primarily due to the high risk of weather related claims -RRB- . Another common reason carriers provide for increasing prmeiumsis to keep pace with inflation , many policies offer inflation guard to keep pace with estimated values . What is the take away here ? Home insurance is WORTH IT ! Protect your home and investment , likely your most expensive one ! Talk to an independent agent today !
The greatwestlife.com website says this about Travel Insurance : `` Our Global Medical Assistance group plan enhancement to your group healthcare plan is designed to provide worldwide assistance to travellers in emergency medical situations , wherever and whenever the need arises . '' It states that coverage is up to $ 1,000,000 per covered trip and that they rate the trip on a scale of 1-6 , with the option to cover trips that last up to 30 days . Visit their website for more accurate information and to contact Great-West Life .
Hey , it happens . Sometimes we make a mistake and end up in a situation we did n't intend . It does n't mean you ca n't get car insurance , it just changes the finances . Now , I can only speak for the State of Michigan , but I do n't imagine it 's very different in other states . When your insurance company finds out you got a DUI -LRB- and they will -RRB- , they will , most likely , cancel your policy as you 're no longer eligible to be covered under a standard company . There are , however , other nonstandard companies that will be happy to insure you , at a price . Companies such as Titan/Victoria , Progressive , Bristol West , and others will still insure you . Now , I 'm assuming you still have a valid license -LRB- If not , it 'll be more difficult -RRB- . It would n't surprise me if your premiums tripled or more with these companies but there are ways to help manage your costs . If you look at the quotes from these companies , you 'll probably see that more than half the premium is in the physical damage coverages -LRB- comprehensive and collision -RRB- . If you can live without these coverages , you can save a lot of money , but be aware that they will not fix your car if you have damage . Also , if your car is leased or financed , you 're bound by contract to carry these coverages . In this case , you can raise deductibles but it wo n't make a huge difference . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages , these are much more important . Now the bad news . You may not be eligible to be insured with a standard carrier for up to 5 years . And you thought the fines and court costs were high . This is where it really hurts . I hope you have a good agent , he/she is your best friend right now . Work with them and see what you can do to minimize your costs without sacrificing the most important coverages
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
It can vary a lot from one person to the next , and even what city and state you live in . In my area of the country -LRB- the mid-west -RRB- I would save an average person spends from $ 60 - $ 150 / month for full coverage car insurance . Your credit will play a role in your rate as well as your driving record and even what other drivers might have access to your car .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
The cost of homeowners insurance is determined by several factors . Location , type of house , condition of the property , claim history and personal credit are some of the major factors . In Virginia , homeowners insurance typically ranges between $ 400 - $ 1,800 per year . In Maryland , rates are typically between $ 600 - $ 2,500 . In South Carolina , homeowners insurance is very expensive especially if you live on the coast . Insurance rates in Hilton Head , SC can exceed $ 5,000 for a modest home .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Anyone Buy A Life Insurance Policy On Someone Else ?
In order to take a policy out on another individual you must have some sort of insurable interest . A family member , an employer , a creditor , are all examples of insurable interest . The party being insured must also have knowledge and approve of the insurance and sign the application .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
No - You can name ME as your beneficiary ... . hehehe In order to buy life insurance on someone , you have to have an `` insurable interest '' ... I ca n't buy life insurance on just anyone . There has to be a connection that would harm you financially should the person pass away . Examples are your spouse , kids , other family if you have a financial interest in something together , a business partner , someone you loaned $ $ to , etc. . I bring up insurable interest because in these cases , you , or someone else facing a financial loss due to the persons death , has to be the beneficiary . Now ... if you buy life insurance on yourself , you can pretty much name any person or legal entity as the beneficiary . Leave the funds to a spouse , kids , your favorite non-profit , or to me ... Ok . Not me . So the answer of `` who can be the beneficiary '' all depends on who the insured is , the owner of the policy , and what the connection between everyone involved . have more questions -- Reach out ! - gravy
Yes , you can get Life Insurance on someone else . Refer to Peggy 's comment on insurable interest . Here are a few situations which you can look at getting life insurance on someone else -LRB- keep in mind , for anyone over 18 , they have to sign the application as well -RRB- : Parent insuring children , Spousal insurance , Insuring a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee or insuring your business partner so if he passes , you can purchase his ownership from his family . If you have a situation that I did not cover here as there are more , reach out to your broker or contact one of us .
If you mean , can you pay for a policy for someone else so that there will be a death benefit when they die , the answer is : usually . Most people who buy term life insurance for someone else do it to protect themselves in some way . E.g. . That other person may owe them money , or the Payer knows he/she will have the task of paying for the funeral if the other person dies . Life insurance companies look carefully if the Payer is also the Owner of a policy in which someone else is the Insured . They are not as concerned if you simply pay for a policy for someone else and allow the Insured to own their own policy .
Almost anyone who wants to buy a life insurance policy can do so . If they are buying it for themselves as the insured person , they must have some sort of income or assets to financially qualify for the amount they are purchasing . If owning a policy on someone else , there must be a close family tie or insurable interest . In the US , those buying life insurance must be citizens , have a Green Card , or -LRB- with some companies -RRB- have a work Visa .
Life insurance is not essential unless you are required to purchase it by a legal contract or you love someone else . If you dont love anyone else , then you dont care what people think about you . Your passing will be of little consequence . If you leave a mess , you wont care .
Most anyone can purchase life insurance on themself . If you want to purchase life insurance on someone else , you must have an insurable interest . You would usually need to be a spouse , parent , child , or business partner of the insured . You would also need their knowledge and approval . If you buy a funeral Preneed insurance on a family member , they do not have to be aware of it provided you are their next of kin and will be responsible for their funeral costs .
Yes , if you are driving someone else s car and you are involved in an accident your insurance pays first . If the damages go beyond your insurance limits then the car owners policy would pay . Anyone who has a drivers license needs to have insurance or a Financial Responsibility Bond even if they do not own a car , unless they do not drive at all . If you loan your car to someone make sure they have insurance .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
Anyone who needs life insurance that will last until death at any age needs Whole Life Insurance or Universal Life Insurance with a no lapse guarantee . Without that , the policy might end just before it is needed , and then the possibility of getting a new life insurance policy might not exist . I.e. if you want life insurance to cover final expense , or to pass an estate to someone else , a permanent policy is needed .
Some carriers are doing exactly what Ty said ... they have a box that can be checked and you have the `` extra coverage '' needed for a ride share gig . WITHOUT the endorsement , your `` normal car insurance '' is very , very , very unlikely to cover any claim while your vehicle is being used for `` business use '' . That applies to anyone like a real estate agent , insurance agent , or anyone else that wraps their car , drives prospects & clients around , etc. ... . KNOW what you 're buying .
That is a great question ! If you are someone who will struggle with being able to afford quality healthcare when you turn 65 , then yes , it is very popular . If you are someone who believes that each person should be financially secure enough to be able to pay for themselves , and that `` I should n't have to help pay for anyone else 's care '' , then it probably is n't . The sad fact is that according to the 2012 census data nearly 55 % of all Senior Citizens live in poverty , and without Medicare/Medicaid , we would have an awful lot less Senior Citizens . It is available to all Americans once they reach the age of 65 , and that makes it very popular . Thanks for asking !
Anyone can own their own life insurance policy , when they are the insured person in the policy . Sometimes people think that someone else should own their life insurance policy for tax purposes , when the possibility of their estate ever being large enough to incur estate taxes is nil , and life insurance does not incur income taxes . But there are legitimate situations -LRB- for tax purposes and otherwise -RRB- where another person owning the policy is wise . To own the policy , that person must have a financial interest in the life of the insured person . It is the owner of the policy who has the right to change the beneficiary . So be careful when choosing an owner .
You can ask your parents or grandparents . If they do not have life insurance on you , and you have not signed an application as the Insured for anyone else , it is doubtful that anyone has a policy on you . Life insurance requires the consent of the insured person , if the Insured is an adult . And that consent nearly always requires that the Insured signs the application .
If the policy is on you and you are owner of the policy , you can generally name whoever you want as beneficiary . If you own the policy on the life of someone else , then the beneficiary should have an insurable interest with the insured -LRB- e.g. you buy a policy on your child and name their live in partner as beneficiary -RRB- . If you are able to purchase a policy on someone else , you already have an insurable interest in the insured , so can be the beneficiary yourself , in most situations . Keep in mind that different life insurance companies can have different determinations of what is allowed . Check with a broker beforehand to find out which carriers will work with you to set up the type of policy arrangement you need , or to set up your policy in another way to accomplish your goals .
Life insurance demonstrates that you love someone else . If your death is going to have an impact on someone you love , then life insurance can help -LRB- perhaps a great deal . -RRB- Sometimes life insurance is required to protect the interest of a lender or a contract holder -LRB- who you might not love . -RRB- In the end , though , most life insurance is purchased because people love each someone else .
Life insurance empowers you . We all know that the policy pays out when you die . Therefore , in order to buy it , you have to face the fact that this event will some day take place . Guaranteed . Thats a scary thought , and most people dont like to think it . They prefer to think about other fun stuff . When it comes to financial products , they want to put as much money as possible into their pocket . Not somebody elses . And yet that is what you are doing when you buy life insurance : thinking about somebody elses financial welfare . So you not only look your own mortality right in the face and accept it , but you rise above it and take care of somebody else . Someone you love , and care for , and for whom you want nothing but the best . Life insurance helps you be altruistic and benevolent to the highest degree . And you know what ? That is a great way to be .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Can I Get Health Insurance If I Am Overweight ?
It depends on your BMI -LRB- body metric index -RRB- . If your BMI is less than 40 you may be able to buy individual insurance . Employer group health insurance plans generally can not deny coverage regardless of pre-existing conditions . Your state may have an assigned risk pool , carrier of last resort , or other guaranteed issue policies .
One of the major `` Wins '' of the health reform law is that major medical plans are no longer underwritten , which means regardless of Body Mass Index -LRB- Height $ Weight -RRB- or pre-existing medical conditions , all applicants are guarantee issued on plans . So , regardless of how much you weigh , you 'll still be able to pick up coverage in 2014 and beyond .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Being overweight affects life insurance differently , depending on what type of policy you are getting . If you are getting a No Exam policy that gives you a set rate just for qualifying , then your weight will not make a difference , just as long as you do not weigh over the maximum amount . Some policies have no weight limit at all . If you are applying for a policy that does require medical underwriting , fluctuations of just a few pounds can cause your rate to go up . If you start out just slightly overweight , this increase may not make a lot of difference , or you may even find one company that will rate you much lower than the rest . But if you are quite overweight , the price increase can be large , or you can even be declined . Weight is one of those areas where it really helps to shop around . Not only do different companies have different weight charts , but sometimes going with a No Exam policy can beat the price of one requiring an exam , when the applicant is overweight or obese . Using an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance can certainly help save time , money and frustration .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
If you are denied Life Insurance , then you are not covered meaning if you die , no benefit will be paid to your heirs . There are 3 basic reasons a life insurance policy will be declined : 1 . You health is not good ! I am talking more than just smoking or a little overweight . Perhaps there is a history of heart attack , cancer , etc. 2 . You have risky hobbies such as skydiving , hang gliding , rock climbing , scuba diving , etc. 3 . You are in the Military and are deployed to a `` hot zone '' which the insurance companies determine or perhaps you are vacationing in a `` hot zone '' . This said , all companies have different underwriting . I would recommend talking to a broker who can shop around for you . Fill out a questionnaire which all the details so different underwriters can review and see how these companies will rate you .
Perhaps . How are you defining overweight ? If someone is obese , it is possible you will be declined coverage . You do have options with carriers who do not ask the ht/wt question however you will be limited on the death benefit you can apply for . Other questions which will go along with someone being overweight : Do you see your doctor regularly ? Diabetes is a common result of being overweight . Have you been told you have or do not have Diabetes ? Blood Pressure and Cholesterol readings I agree with Lenny , speak with your agent/broker , provide as much information you can so an underwriter may be consulted prior to an application .
Most overweight people can get life insurance . If overweight or obese , they can usually get any amount and type of coverage they desire . If morbidly obese , there are simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies that have no weight limit at all ; however , they will have a low maximum face amount and only come in one or two types of coverage . Contact an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance to find your lowest price .
Yes , most people can get some type of life insurance policy if overweight , even if you are morbidly obese -LRB- do n't you hate that label -RRB- . There are a handful of companies that will provide first day coverage -LRB- no graded period -RRB- without any weight requirement at all . Most policies that disregard weight will have a graded period , where the death benefit paid during the first couple of years would be reduced for death due to natural causes . Some simplified issue polices -LRB- no exam needed -RRB- have very liberal weight charts . These can be a good choice , especially if you have not had your blood tested for a while . There are also some fully underwritten policies that have much more lenient weight charts than others . If you are applying for a large policy , certain companies can save you thousands of dollars . Be sure to contact an impaired risk or overweight life insurance expert for your life insurance if you are significantly overweight . Not only do you need a variety of choices , you need the experience of someone who knows how to maneuver the factors involved : weight changes over the past year , health conditions that can be associated with build , etc. .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Yes , you can get life insurance if you 're overweight . The height/weight profile is one of the biggest factors in the underwriting process - it 's one of the first risk measurements used by insurance companies to determine what risk class the carrier will assign and what rates to charge . The acceptable height/weight range for each risk class can vary substantially from company to company . If you are considered overweight , life insurance companies will want to know the following information to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- What is your current height/weight ? 2 -RRB- Have you gained or lost more than 20 pounds in the past year ? Is your weight stable ? 3 -RRB- Are you a smoker or use tobacco products ? 4 -RRB- Are you being treated for high blood pressure or cholesterol ? 5 -RRB- Have you had any abnormal lab results ? 6 -RRB- Any history of cancer or heart disease in the immediate family before age 60 ? 7 -RRB- Do you have any co-morbid conditions , such as diabetes , heart disease , sleep apnea , tobacco use , etc ? Obesity is a condition which can receive favorable underwriting a few companies may also be able to offer a standard rate even when a table rating would normally apply if you purchase permanent insurance instead of term insurance through a table reduction program . Table ratings require an extra premium compared to a standard rate . An example would be a Table D / Table 4 rate would be approximately two times the standard rate . If you are overweight , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer ! You need the help of and independent life insurance agent that can shop your medical profile informally -LRB- no personal information is revealed to the insurance companies , just a general medical profile -RRB- .
Yes , obese persons can get life insurance as long as they do not have any health conditions that cause them to be declined . There are policies out there even for obese persons with poor health . Several life insurance policies do not have any height and weight charts at all . Contact an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance to obtain a personalized quote for life insurance for persons who are overweight , obese , or morbidly obese .
Yes , most people can get life insurance if they are overweight . Some things that might create a difficulty are if they also have a serious health condition such as uncontrolled diabetes or recent heart attack , or if their weight is in the morbidly obese category . However , there are many policies with lenient weight limits , and there is at least one policy in almost every state that does not have any weight limit at all . Some of these will work for persons with health conditions , as well , and some of them will even pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one -LRB- are not graded -RRB- . You need to work with agencies that carry a variety of policies like this so that you can get the most affordable overweight life insurance premium .
That is an interesting question . I 've been an agent for many years , and I can speak from experience when I tell you that price is not based on color . I do not work with any companies -LRB- and I work with many -RRB- that would even consider breaking the law that way . That said , there are some things that come into play that might make you think -LRB- wrongly , I promise you -RRB- that It may cost more for African Americans . Life insurance costs are based in great part upon risk factors , including high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity . These factors , along with heart disease are statistically common among all Americans , but much more so among African Americans . The American Heart Association in an article released last September suggests that a gene found in African Americans may be the cause for the highest rates of hypertension in the world . This disease is the leading cause of heart disease -LRB- # 1 killer of Americans -RRB- and strokes -LRB- # 4 killer -RRB- . Their article also outlines problems with obesity -LRB- 63 % of men , 77 % of women over 20 years old -RRB- among the community , as well as higher rates of diabetes -LRB- 2x as likely as whites to have it , among those 20 and older 15 % have the disease -RRB- . The US Dept. of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health documents higher rates of cancers among the African American community in 2009 research , as well as higher mortality rates . Insurance companies are n't as concerned about the causes and reasons behind the statistics , as much as the heath issues of the applicants . If you are of any race , your rate will be higher if you suffer from diabetes or hypertension , especially if it has gone uncontrolled . The life expectancy of anyone with those issues is shortened , and so the companies bear more risk , and as a result charge more . The better the health , the cheaper the rates might be a simple way to put it , since the risk to the company determines the rate they will charge to insure you . If you smoke , expect to pay more . If you are overweight , expect to pay more . This will be true regardless of race , where you live , or the amount of coverage you apply for . I hope that this helps you understand how the industry works , and why it might seem like it is unfair . Thanks for asking !
Life insurance is a policy that your money pays for but your health is what buys it . The healthier you are the better the rate . As health issues surface we go down the line of insurability until we finally can not be approved for anything but a guaranteed issue plan . Companies will look at the whole picture . For example , a person with controlled high blood pressure and no health issues may get standard rates . A person who is overweight and has high blood pressure may receive a higher rate than standard and a person who has high blood pressure , is overweight , smokes , and is on heart medication may be declined . A good life insurance agent can help you find an affordable plan and help guide you .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you 're overweight . The height/weight profile is one of the biggest factors in the underwriting process - it 's one of the first risk measurements used by insurance companies to determine what risk class the carrier will assign and what rates to charge . The acceptable height/weight range for each risk class can vary substantially from company to company . If you are considered overweight , life insurance companies will want to know the following information to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- What is your current height/weight ? 2 -RRB- Have you gained or lost more than 20 pounds in the past year ? Is your weight stable ? 3 -RRB- Are you a smoker or use tobacco products ? 4 -RRB- Are you being treated for high blood pressure or cholesterol ? 5 -RRB- Have you had any abnormal lab results ? 6 -RRB- Any history of cancer or heart disease in the immediate family before age 60 ? 7 -RRB- Do you have any co-morbid conditions , such as diabetes , heart disease , sleep apnea , tobacco use , etc ? Obesity is a condition which can receive favorable underwriting a few companies may also be able to offer a standard rate even when a table rating would normally apply if you purchase permanent insurance instead of term insurance through a table reduction program . Table ratings require an extra premium compared to a standard rate . An example would be a Table D / Table 4 rate would be approximately two times the standard rate . If you are overweight , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer ! You need the help of an independent life insurance agent that can shop your medical profile informally -LRB- no personal information is revealed to the insurance companies , just a general medical profile -RRB- . Feel free to send me a message using the `` contact me '' button if you have any other questions .
You can certainly be denied life insurance with some companies due to weight , but that does not mean you can not get life insurance at all . There are a handful of companies that do not ask any height or weight questions , so all that matters is that your health fits their guidelines . Whether overweight , obese , or morbidly obese , there are affordable overweight life insurance options out there if you look in the right places .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
If you are moderately overweight , it will not affect your rate much at all . If you are obese , the policy may cost double or more of what a policy for those with `` prefect '' weight would be , but the price is still very affordable . Being morbidly obese can restrict your choices to No Exam policies that have higher prices . In any event , overweight persons can get life insurance , and using an agency that specializes in policies like that can save you hundreds of dollars .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Disability Insurance For ?
Disability Insurance , also commonly referred to in the insurance world as `` paycheck protection , '' pays a benefit to the insured should she become disabled -LRB- sick or injured -RRB- and unable to work . The monthly benefit typically covers 60-65 % of one 's income and can be used for rent , bills , groceries , medical co-pays , etc. .
Disability insurance provides replacement income to a worker who has become unable to work due to illness or injury . There are Disability insurance policies that will pay for short term or long term disability . The policies will pay cash to the insured person for the length of the time that his/her disability continues , or for a set period of time , depending on the features of the policy .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
Some things to consider when buying disability insurance are : 1 -RRB- Do you want short term disability insurance , or long term disability insurance , or both ? Long term disability is recommended if you can not afford both , as the effects of being unable to work for many months or years is the most devastating . 2 -RRB- How much -LRB- what % -RRB- of your income do you wish to replace ? It usually makes sense to get as much as you can . 3 -RRB- Do you want to spend more to have Own Occupation feature ? If not , you will need to go back to work when you can do any job . With `` own occ '' you will be paid until you can go back to your own occupation . 4 -RRB- What about Residual Disability ? Getting a policy that offers Residual Disability enables you to receive a partial benefit based proportionate to the amount of income lost when able to resume working part time -LRB- unlike Partial Disability , which just pays a set % -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What does your policy cover ? Make sure it covers illness and injury , and review the conditions covered .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There 's many companies that offer disability insurance such as Guardian , MetLife , Assurity , Standard , Principal , just to name a few . The DEFINITION OF DISABILITY is the single most important factor when determining which disability insurance policy to apply for . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Top Rated Auto Insurance Company ?
There are actually many top-rated auto insurance companies . The reason is that there are many types of ratings to consider and also numerous rating Agencies . Typically , the highest-rated carriers are often the largest insurers , such as Geico , Progressive , State Farm , Farmers , Nationwide and Allstate . However , companies such as Esurance and Safe Auto have been expanding market share in certain areas and should often be considered when comparing rates . An experienced broker can easily compare the top-rated carriers in your area , and recommend the most affordable options .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
There is no one top rated life insurance company , but every life insurance company has the chance to earn the top ratings from several different rating companies . That being said , only a small % of companies get the top rating . To find a company 's rating , you can go to their website and hit the `` About Us '' tab . The main rating companies are AM Best -LRB- for which A + + is their top rating -RRB- , S&P -LRB- for which AAA is highest -RRB- , Fitch -LRB- also uses AAA for best rating -RRB- and Moody 's -LRB- Aaa is their top rating -RRB- .
Since I have no personal connection or experience with Colonial Penn Life Insurance Company my first `` go to '' for information about any insurance company is to check the independent ratings . You can check them for yourself by searching the internet for `` comdex rating for ___ '' whatever company you want to search for . What I found for Colonial Penn was that they do not rank among the top 250 life insurance companies in America as of December 2013 . Top Life INsurance Reviews.com posted the comdex along with the AM Best , Standard & Poor , Moody 's , and Fitch rankings for each of the top 250 and Colonial Penn was not listed .
Uber drivers must be fully insured when operating a vehicle in all states . When you are working for Uber , their auto insurance policy will provide coverage . However , when their app is not in use , your own personal policy is utilized . Regardless of which state you reside , you must meet all of the minimum liability and financial responsibility requirements . Both fault and no-fault states are included . For example , in Ohio , the Buckeye State 's minimum liability requirement is $ 25,000 per person , $ 50,000 per accident , and an additional $ 25,000 of property damage . Typically , financed and leased vehicles must carry collision and comprehensive benefits . Important : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's leading car insurance brokers with more than 35 years of expert and unbiased experience . His top-rated website , Carinsurancezoom.org provides consumers with free online quotes and the lowest auto insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Getting life insurance online in Ohio can save you time , money and frustration . Purchasing a policy through an Ohio broker and their website will allow you to shop and compare the top-rated companies and their policies . As an Ohio broker for more than 32 years , we 're aware of which carrier offer the best rates and what types of plans are the most appropriate for your situation . We 're `` in your community '' and share the same goals and dreams you do . The combination of a top-rated website and three decades of local experience is tough to beat ! Term and permanent coverage is available that is suitable for the vast majority of people that apply . For persons with serious medical conditions , there are companies that specialize in non-standard risks and often the prices are extremely affordable . `` No physical '' policies are also available from many of the top carriers .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
There are a number of ways to review the ratings of life insurance companies . One is through rating agencies . The most popular rating agencies are AM Best , Standard 's and Poore 's -LRB- S&P -RRB- , Fitch 's , and Weiss . They each have a different set of letters and numbers . You can find the rating of Term Life Insurance companies by going to their website and the `` About Us '' or `` Financial Information '' tabs . Some companies are rated highest in one category but not another , so you can look at all four for a total picture of the company you are investigating . Another way to judge life insurance companies is by their customer satisfaction or complaints . You can also look at financial information . The ratings of the company , along with customer reviews and company financial 's , can help you determine the strength of any company you are looking at . Keep in mind that the rating of companies can fluctuate . Some that were rated poorly in the past have made adjustments to bring their ratings up . Also , it does not take the top rating to be a secure company .
What are the best rated auto insurance companies ? Based on my professional opinion and 33 years as one of the nation 's leading auto insurance brokers -LRB- with a top-rated website -RRB- , here are the handful of carriers that are on just about everyone 's list : USAA State Farm Geico Farmers Esurance Liberty Mutual Nationwide Geico Erie American Family Progressive Allstate Travelers I know . That 's a pretty big list ! It 's important to understand that your rate depends on numerous factors , and it is possible that one company offers terrific rates in your area , and is 40 % higher than most other companies in another area . Thus , the importance of utilizing a broker is never bigger .
The best auto and home insurance company will be different for every applicant . With more than 33 years of experience as a broker -LRB- and top-rated websites -RRB- , this question is often asked . Here 's the secret to getting the best rates and coverage from the top companies . Use a broker ! There is no cost or fee and typically , you 'll save money , time and a lot of frustration !
Unfortunately , there is n't one company that is best in the immediate annuity marketplace . Different companies are more and/or less competitive depending on demographics . A company might have better rates for women than men or for someone in their 60s versus someone in their 80s . Some companies also offer inflation adjustments while some do n't . Some companies even allow some access to monies already annuitized . It really depends on the person and their situation . It is best to work with an independent broker that can show you some of the top companies with the top rates so that you can pick what is best for your situation .
Auto insurance in Ohio is actually fairly inexpensive ... if you know where to look . As an experienced broker here in Ohio -LRB- just North of Cincinnati -RRB- , we specialize in finding the lowest available rates offered by the top-rated carriers . Prices are based on many factors including your age , where you live , the type of vehicle you drive and how good -LRB- or bad ! -RRB- your driving record is . Typically , rates here in the Buckeye state are lower than most other states . A younger driver -LRB- under 21 -RRB- will usually pay a higher rate . There are , however , many discounts that can help reduce the premium . Each carrier has a different set of discounts so shopping can make a big difference . Also , by having an experienced broker shop for you , you may be able to find better pricing . Whether its State Farm , Esurance , Progressive , Geico or Farmers -LRB- or many others -RRB- , as experienced brokers with top-rated websites , our job is to help consumers find not only the best prices , but the most appropriate coverage for their specific circumstances .
The cost to insure a Jeep Wrangler depends on many factors including where you live -LRB- county and/or zip code -RRB- , your age , the number of moving violations/accidents in the last three years , the age of the vehicle , and the coverage -LRB- collision , comprehensive , liability limits etc. . . -RRB- that you need . The monthly rate could be as little as $ 25 of much much more . Some carriers will give you a substantial discount if you have excellent or superior credit . Additional discounts are often available if you are a member of AAA or AARP , or package your homeowner 's or renter 's insurance with the car insurance company that covers your Jeep Wrangler . Fortunately , it only takes a few moments to obtain a free quote and compare the cheapest companies . Answer to this question was provided by www.carinsurancezoom.org , the premier auto insurance resource for consumers , and providing the lowest rates from top-rated companies . Ed Harris has been a top US Broker for more than 34 years and owns the website .
A top-heavy plan is one that benefits company officers , owners , employee shareholders , etc. and/or key employees . If a qualified plan becomes top-heavy , there are top heavy tests that ensure the other employees receive fair to equal treatment with similar benefits under the plan . In general , the basic definition of a top heavy defined contribution plan is when total account balances of key employees exceed 60 % of the total retirement accounts .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
You can switch auto insurance in the middle of your term . That is , if you have a 6 or 12 month policy where the rate is guaranteed during that time , you can change companies . If you paid ahead , you may receive a short-rated refund , depending on the timing and carrier . If you shop a top auto insurance website , you will be able to view multiple quotes from the most reputable companies and perhaps save money . An experienced broker can do the shopping for you so you do the saving . What a great concept !
Rates will vary per individual in California . Rates are based on years driving experience , location , driving record and milesdrivenannually . We do not use credit in California . With those being the top 4 notnecessarilyin that order there are other factors to consider . Type of vehicle , occupation or if you are a good student with a 3.0 or better can have an impact on your rates . Other factors to consider better rates arecombininghome or renters insurance and auto insurance for multi-policy discounts . Multi car is another rating factor and whether your single or married is a rating factor . And of course what are the level ofcoverage 's chosen have adeterminingfactor on your rate . All these things should be discussed with a local independent agent who can shop different insurance carriers to find the right policy with the rightcoverage ` sto meet your insurance needs at an affordable premium .
You can look at ratings done by agencies such as S&P , AM Best , Moody 's , and Fitch 's to see which companies have the highest ratings . There are several that rank at the top in all categories . However , insurance companies are strictly regulated , and you can feel safe buying a policy with any company that ranks in the top several categories of ratings .
Life insurance for a smoker costs less than you may realize . Rates for nicotine users have reduced in recent years and many affordable smoking policies are offered by the top-rated companies . The best prices are typically found by experienced brokers and our top-ranked websites that can accomplish hours of research almost instantaneously . And best of all , the quotes are always free and applying for coverage is simple . That 's our specialty . Here are some sample monthly rates -LRB- below -RRB- . Prices are based on a healthy smoking 35 year-old male : $ 79.31 - $ 500,000 20-year guarantee $ 45.41 - $ 250,000 20-year guarantee $ 30.06 - $ 250,000 10-year guarantee $ 39.83 - $ 350,000 10-year guarantee Rates are based on the most competitive offers at the time of the quote request . Only `` A '' rated companies were considered . Of course , all policies are subject to underwriting guidelines .
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
end question
